consistency within personality types suggest more integration or harmony regarding
traits, interests, values, and perceptions than lower degrees of consistency. Holland
assumes that consistent persons are more predictable in their behavior and more
likely to be higher achievers in their careers than persons who are not consistent. It is
important to note, however, that it is not a goal of career counseling to make clients
more consistent. Rather, the primary use of consistency in career counseling relates
to client awareness. Specifically, it is important for clients with low consistency (e.g.,
a realistic-social personality type) to be aware of the fact that it may be difficult for
them to find an occupational environment that will allow them to express the diverse
aspects of their personalities. In such cases it is often necessary for clients to identify
avocational activities that provide opportunities for expressing personality types that
are not expressed in work. For example, a realistic-social personality type working
as a social worker may choose to spend her leisure time in woodworking activities.

Vocational Identity

Vocational identity is defined as the “possession of a clear and stable picture of one’s
goals, interests, and talent” (Holland, 1985a, p. 5). Vocational identity is an impor-
tant goal of many career development interventions and is dependent upon acquiring
sufficient occupational and self-information.

Applying Holland’s Theory

Congruence, differentiation, consistency, and vocational identity are the key theoret-
ical constructs used to link Holland’s theory to practice. “All things being equal, an
individual with high identity who is congruent, consistent, and differentiated should
be more predictable and better adjusted than one who is incongruent, inconsistent,


--- chapter2/34.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND ApatyiNG THEORtes oF Career DevetormeNT = 75

and undifferentiated” (Spokane et al., 2002, p. 385). Assessment instruments devel-
oped by Holland and his associates are typically used co measure these constructs,
and the results from these measures provide the stimuli for career counseling content.

For example, the Self-Directed Search (SDS) (Holland, 1994) and the Vocational
Preference Inventory (VPI) (Holland, 1985b) are used to translate individuals’ self-
estimates of interests and competencies into Holland types. The SDS consists of an
assessment booklet (used to identify the individual’s Holland type), an Occupations
Finder (two versions are available, each contain a listing of 1,334 occupations clas-
sified according to either three-letter Holland codes or presented in alphabetical
order), and an interpretive guide titled You and Your Career. The latter provides
individuals with additional information, activities, and readings related to using
Holland’s theory in career decision making. The SDS, which is the most widely used
interest inventory, is available in different versions based on reading level (SDS Form E),
setting (SDS CP, Corporate Version), and language spoken,

The SDS provides a useful starting point and straightforward approach for
focusing Juanita’s career exploration and information gathering. First, Juanita can
use the assessment booklet to identify her three-letter summary code. (Because re-
searchers have found a high error rate in sammary code calculations {e.g., Miller,
1997], it is important that counselors take precautions to minimize such errors.)
Then Juanita and the career counselor can review her summary code (“ASI” with low
differentiation) to explore how her abilities and interests relate to the characteristics
of the types her summary code comprises.

It is especially important to discuss with the client his or her summary code when
the code lacks consistency. A client with a code of RSA, for example, may have diffi-
culty finding occupations that resemble this code exactly (few jobs require workers to
have strong mechanical abilities and strong social skills). Clients who do not under-
stand this fact can experience a sort of “pendulum shifting” in their career choices.
That is, a person may opt for a realistic, or R, occupation and find that, for a time,
it is satisfactory in that it offers the opportunity for engaging in R tasks and rewards
R competencies. Over time, however, the person may begin noticing the absence of
social, or $, opportunities in his or her R work. The absence of $ opportunities may
lead to a growing sense that the R occupation needs to be replaced with one in the S
environment. If this occupational change occurs, it may provide satisfaction initially,
but, over time, the person may feel that the occupation is too S and not enough R
and the pendulum may shift back toward desiring an R occupation.

Helping the client who is low in consistency to become aware of the possible
“pendulum shifting” that can occur in occupational decision making is important
because, if a congruent occupational environment is not possible, appropriate avo-
cational activities may provide the solution (rather than an ongoing shifting from
occupations in one Holland environment to another), In these instances, counselors
may use the Leisure Activities Finder (Holmberg, Rosen, & Holland, 1990) to help
clients identify opportunities to express important dimensions of their personali-
ties that they may not be able to express in work. For example, the person with an
RSA code may choose to emphasize working with things (R} at work (perhaps as a
cook), but spend leisure time in activities emphasizing the social (S) theme (e.g., as
youth group leader for a church). As noted, it is important for career counselors to


--- chapter2/35.jpg ---

76 = Cuapter 2

understand that consistency is not a goal of career counseling. Rather, consistency is
aconstruct that helps clients understand who they are and then use this understand-
ing to make effective career decisions.

Clients with codes that lack differentiation (determined by comparing either the
client’s highest score minus the lowest score among the six types or by examining
the numerical difference among the client’s three-letter code) often experience a lack
of focus in their career direction for a number of reasons. Persons may lack differ-
entiation because: (a) they lack exposure to activities across Holland environments,
(b) they have difficulty in decision making, (c) they have multipotentiality, or
(d) they are depressed.

Clients lacking in exposure to Holland environments (e.g., young people with
little or no work experience, homemakers returning to the labor market after an
extended departure) may need help increasing their self-understanding related to
interests, abilities, and values. In such instances, counselors may use activities such
as values inventories, values card sorts, or skills checklists to foster client understand-
ing of these career decision-making variables. Those persons returning to the labor
market after an extended departure may find it particularly useful to engage in an
“accomplishments exercise” in which the counselor invites the client to list activi-
ties, or accomplishments, about which the client feels especially proud. As the client
describes the activity, the counselor encourages the client to list the skills embedded
in the successful performance of the activity. After engaging in this discussion for
several activities, the counselor and client will have generated a long list of skills the
client demonstrated in the successful completion of each activity he or she described.
These skills can then be categorized according to Holland type and the counselor and
client can review the skills they enjoy using most to identify the Holland type that
reflects the client’s dominant type. Undifferentiated clients with limited work experi-
ences may also need to take steps such as information interviewing, volunteering, and
job shadowing to increase their self-understanding and become more differentiated.

Clients with decision-making difficulties can be taught decision-making skills
and then encouraged to retake the SDS and/or to discuss their perceptions as to
which Holland types they most closely resemble. As an alternative to retaking the
SDS in these instances, the client can engage in a Holland card sort activity in which
the client sorts through activities according to the degree to which he or she likes,
dislikes, or feels neutral toward each activity. Each group of cards can then be re-
viewed in light of the Holland types they reflect. During this activity, the counselor
can observe how difficult it is for the client to make decisions. After having been
taught decision-making skills and after engaging in self-assessment activities and
reviewing occupational information, some clients may remain undecided. Indecisive
clients may have concerns that result in a “fear of deciding.” Clients may be fearful
of making choices for a variety of factors. For example, a client may have excessive
fears related to failing, succeeding, or disappointing significant others. In these in-
stances, the counselor and client will need to engage in a counseling or therapy-like
process to help the client understand his or her fears.

Scores on the SDS that are elevated and undifferentiated may also reflect the fact
that, rather than being indecisive or lacking experience, the client is multipotentialed
in interests and competencies. This is, in fact, the case for Holland himself, who


--- chapter2/36.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND ApplyinG THEORIES OF Career Deveiorment — 77

has elevated and undifferentiated scores across almost all Holland types (Weinrach,
1996)! For clients with elevated and undifferentiated SDS scores, the counselor
may find it useful to focus on the client’s values as a guide for making occupational
decisions. Finally, counselors also need to determine whether clients with low
scores for all Holland types are having difficulty with depression or low self-esteem.
Given Juanita’s difficulties in school and her young age, all of the aforementioned
possibilities should be explored in relationship to the low differentiation in her
summary code.

With a general understanding of the Holland typology and a specific understand-
ing of their own Holland summary codes, clients are ready to examine the Occupa-
tions Finder to locate occupations that resemble their summary codes. Each client
focuses on occupations resembling all combinations of his or her summary code (e.g.,
Juanita would explore occupations in the categories of ASI, SIA, AIS, SAI, IAS, and
ISA). Clients then identify specific occupations within these categories that are of
interest to them.

Next, counselors encourage clients to take some sort of action (e.g., information
interviewing, reading about occupational requirements, job shadowing) to increase
their understanding of occupations of interest. Clients can then discuss with their
counselors the information they acquire from these activities and narrow their list
of occupational options. In these discussions, counselors encourage clients to take
additional steps (e.g., volunteering, taking courses related to a particular occupation,
job searching) toward implementing tentative occupational choices. In discussing the
information the client obtains, the counselor and client also review how each specific
option provides opportunities for expressing the types comprising the client’s sum-
mary code. The overarching goals in this process are to clarify the client’s vocational
identity and help the client make a congruent career decision.

In addition to the SDS, counselors can use the VPI in helping clients identify their
Holland type and connect their summary codes to congruent occupational environ-
ments. The VPI (1985b) contains 160 occupational titles, the six type scales, and
five supplemental scales (self-control, masculinity, status, infrequency, and acquies-
cence). To assess vocational identity, counselors can use the instrument entitled My
Vocational Situation (MVS) (Holland, Gottfredson, & Power, 1980}. Specifically,
the MVS measures vocational identity and perceived career development barriers.
‘The Vocational Identity scale measures awareness of and the ability to specify one’s
interests, personality characteristics, strengths, and goals as they relate to career
choices. The Occupational Information (OI) scale of the MVS measures the respon-
dent’s need for occupational information.

Gottfredson and Holland (1996) have also created an inventory (the Position
Classification Inventory [PCI]} for classifying specific work environments using the
Holland typology. Prior to the PCL, which uses the workers’ judgments to classify
the work environment, researchers and counselors relied on conducting an actual
census of workers to classify a specific work environment according to the Holland
types. Because variability exists across same-type occupations in different work
environments, the PCI may be particularly useful in helping clients understand
their degree of congruence in a specific job, Miller and Bass (2003) have found the
PCI to be useful in classifying work environments in a paper manufacturing plant.


--- chapter2/37.jpg ---

78

Cuarter 2

Other inventories also use the Holland typology in reporting assessment results.
For example, the Strong Interest Inventory (SII) (Harmon et al., 1994), the Career
Assessment Inventory (CAI) (Johannson, 1986), and the Armed Services Vocational
Aptitude Battery (ASVAB) (U.S. Department of Defense, 1993) each use Holland’s
types in reporting assessment results.

Evaluating Holland's Theory

Research emanating from Holland’s theory is extensive. In fact, it can be argued
that Holland’s theory has been subjected to more empirical tests than any other
career theory (Spokane & Cruza-Guet, 2005). Gottfredson and Richards (1999)
note that a major advantage of Holland’s theory is that ir provides a parallel way of
describing people and environments. In 1996, Holland summarized research findings
supporting the use of his typology to explain career certainty, career change, and
career satisfaction. From Holland’s review it is evident that his theory continues to
stimulate much research activity. Generally, this activity focuses on (a) the relations
between congruence and important career outcomes, (b) methods for calculating
constructs such as congruence, and (c) the application of Holland’s theory to diverse
populations.

Spokane et al. (2002) summarized the congruence-related research, noting that
although research results are somewhat mixed, there is a “modest relationship be-
tween person-environment fit and job satisfaction” (p. 400). Spokane, Fouad, and
Swanson (2001) argued that most of the congruence-related research, especially in
the early years, was correlational in nature and therefore does not reflect the com-
plexity inherent in person-environment interactions. Longitudinal, cross-sectional,
and experimental studies are needed to more accurately represent person-environment
interactions and to understand the validity of the congruence construct.

Though there are data to support the importance of congruence in vocational
satisfaction, research support for the relationship between consistency and differen-
tiation to vocational outcomes has been weak. Perhaps to an even greater degree than
what is true for the congruence research, research methodologies employed in these
studies have not been sufficiently sophisticated to examine the complex processes
related to consistency, differentiation, and relevant occupational outcomes (e.g.,
satisfaction, stability).

Nonetheless, some interesting studies provide intriguing data related to the
validity of Holland’s theory. For example, Miller (2002) investigated the degree of
change in a male client’s three-letter Holland code over a 10-year time span. The
client initially took the SDS when he was 16 years old. The client’s Holland code
remained stable across the 10-year period, thus supporting Holland’s contention that
personality types measured by the SDS remain stable over time. Lent, Brown, Nota,
and Soresi (2003) examined the relationship of interest congruence to the occupa-
tional choices of 796 Italian high school students. Lent et al. found that interests were
significant predictors of occupational choices for all Holland types.

Oleski and Subich (1996) provided an example of the first type of research in
their investigation of adults in the process of changing careers. Studying 42 nontra-
ditional students (mean age 34.4) pursuing a career change, Oleski and Subich found


--- chapter2/38.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND Appin THEORIES oF Caxeée Deveiorment 79

support for Holland’s (1985a) basic assumption that people change careers to
achieve greater congruence.

Lent and Lopez (1996) investigated the relationship between congruence indi-
ces and job satisfaction among adult workers. Although they found partial overlap
among methods for calculating congruence in their study, Lent and Lopez noted the
need for more research to understand the relations among indices of congruence,
methods for coding work environments, and the antecedents to congruence.

Tracey (2008) found that for college students enrolled in a career development
class, the RIASEC model was related to better career decision-making outcomes
(students considering congruent career options have more career certainty and
career decision-making self-efficacy than those who do not adhere to the congru-
ence principle). In a study examining career persisters versus career changers,
Donahue (2006) found person-environment congruence to be related to career
stability. Perdue, Reardon, and Peterson (2007) also found person-environment
congruence to be associated with job satisfaction within a sample of 198 employees
working for a multinational communications corporation.

Of course, achieving congruence is, in part, dependent upon the availability of
occupations allowing for the expression of one’s personality. Downes and Kraeck
(1996) hypothesized that there is an overall discrepancy between normative occu-
pational interests and the number of existing positions in the United States. Using
normative interest data from the Self-Directed Search and data extracted from the
Monthly Labor Review, Downes and Kroeck found support for their hypothesis.
Specifically, they found a lack of interest for Conventional and Enterprising jobs
relative to the number of existing positions. They found the opposite with regard
to the remaining Holland categories. For instance, there was excess interest among
high school students for Social, Artistic, and Investigative jobs relative to the number
of existing positions. Investigative and Realistic jobs represented high-interest areas
for the adults in the study. Based on their findings, Downes and Kroeck called for a
concerted effort to reshape the interests and skills of the U.S. labor force in order to
meet the labor needs of corporations and educational institutions.

Ryan, Tracey, and Rounds (1996) and Rounds and Tracey (1996) studied the
generalizability of Holland’s (1985a) model of vocational interests across ethnicity,
gender, and SES. Ryan, Tracey, and Rounds found similar interest structures in the
Caucasian and the African American high school students in their study. Ryan and
her colleagues also found no differences in the structure of interests between low- and
high-SES groups. A similar result was obtained when comparing low- and high-SES
Caucasian groups. However, the low-SES African American group was better fit by
Holland’s model than the high-SES African American group. Both male and female
students fit Holland’s model. Thus, Ryan and her colleagues concluded that Holland’s
modet is generalizable across ethnicity, gender, and socioeconomic status as defined in
their study. Oliver and Wachler (2005) found support for Holland’s typology and their
arrangement in circular RIASEC order within a sample of Native Hawaiians.

Mihalik (1996) examined whether clients’ types predicted reactions to counselor
intentions. Using a sample of undergraduate college students, Mihalik found that clients’
vocational interests as measured by the SDS (Holland, 1987) were predictive of client
reactions to counselor interventions. For example, participants with high Enterprising



--- chapter2/39.jpg ---

80

Carter 2

scores responded positively to feeling challenged in counseling and participants with
high Social scores responded positively to being supported by the counselor.

This very brief sample of research provides an indication of the fact that Holland’s
theory has generated more research than any other model of career choice. Much of
this research supports the theory (Holland, 1996; Spokane, 1985; Spokane et al.,
2002). Also, the theory provides a clear link to practice: “The combination of empirical
support and practical application accounts for the theory’s popularity among the pub-
