--- chapter2/1.jpg ---

chapter

42

oSoreeats

aires

Understanding and Applying
Theories of Career Development

Don’t Let Theories Boggle Your Mind.

It is easy to be intimated by the word, theory’ The real world is an ex-

tremely complicated place. Human beings and their bebavior are so complex
that no one understands completely why people think, feel, and act as they
do. A theory is just an explanation—an oversimplified explanation of what
is going on.

A theory is like a road map. Suppose you have a road map of California

and you want to drive from San Francisco to Los Angeles. You see a red
line marked “101” stretching between the two cities on the map. Aha, you
think, Pll drive down that red highway 101. But when you get to the bigh-
way, you see it is black asphalt. Why does the map show it to be red? The
map lies! Why does the map lie? Because the map-maker wants to make it
easier for you to see the path. You drive down the highway and see office
buildings, gardens, and swimming pools, but none of them are indicated
on the map. The map not only distorts reality—it omits zillions of details.
Why? Because all those details would make it too complicated to find the
best route between two cities.

In the same way, a theory attempts to explain a complex situation by

overemphasizing and distorting the importance of certain variables while
ignoring completely other variables that the theory-maker considers irrel-
evant. Theories are oversimplifications just as road maps are oversimplifica-
tions. Yet road maps are very useful for certain purposes—even with all of
their faults. Similarly, theories can be useful—even with their faults.

A theory is just one way of oversimplifying a complex situation so that it

is easier for you to see the big picture. That picture is not reality itself—just
one theory-maker’s version of it.

John D. Krumboltz
Stanford University



--- chapter2/2.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND ApptvinnG THEORIES OF Career Deveroement = 43

@ MyCounselingLab
Visit the MyCounselingLab” site for Career Development Interventions. in.
the 21st Century, Fourth Edition.to enhance’ your understanding of chapter.
‘concepts. You'll have the opportunity to practice yaur skills through video- and
case-based Assignments and Activities aswell as. Building Counseling Skills.
“units, and té prepare for your certification exam with Practice for Certification
quizzes. 5

Jen isa 17yearold Latina student in the eighth grade in a predominantly White,
middle-class neighborhood. She is “normal” in intelligence but reports that she dislikes
school. She associates with a group of girls who are often in trouble with the police. !t
is your impression, however, that these friendships are superficial. Recently, some of the
girls in her circle of friends were arrested for drug possession (marijuenc). Juanita is not
hostile or disrespectful. However, she routinely hands schoolwork in late, if at all. Her
parents have asked you to help her “make a good career choice.”

In most classes, Juanita is apathetic, but she enjoys art class (especially painting} and
being in the school band (she plays the flute). She dislikes math classes. Juanita has wo
younger sisters, ages 12 and 14, Her mother is employed as a teacher's aide ina local
elementary school and her father is employed as a car salesperson in a local dealership.
Juanita’s current plans are to finish high school but she has not made plans for what she
will do beyond that point, She stated thot she “might like to be in a rock band.” She
agrees to meet with you to discuss her career plans

@ CAREER DEVELOPMENT THEORIES

As you read about career development theories, we encourage you to keep John
Krumboltz’s comments in mind and to reflect upon how effectively each of the theories
addresses Juanita’s career concerns. You will notice that career development theories
differ in their coverage of the career development process versus career decision-making
content. Savickas (2002) notes that theories emphasize either “individual differences”
related to occupations {viewed as describing how people can find their fit within the
occupational structure) or “individual development” related to careers (viewed as how
people express career behavior across time). For example, developmental theories (e.g.,
Super, Gottfredson) highlight the expression of career behavior over time. Person-
environment theories (e.g., Work Adjustment Theory, Holland) address the essential
ingredients (i.e., occupational and self-information) for choosing an occupation. One
of the major reasons for studying the various approaches to career theory rather than
concentrating on only one emphasis, whatever that emphasis may be, is the fact that no
one theory is sufficient to explain the totality of individual or group career behavior. As
Super (1992) observed, the question of “which theory is better” is specious because the
theories complement each other in addressing various facets of the complexity of career
behavior. In this sense, each theory adds to the comprehensiveness of insight about


--- chapter2/3.jpg ---

44

Cuarter 2

career behavior that now exists. As John Krumboltz notes above, theories are useful,
even with their limitations. We encourage you to become familiar with the extensive
research literature regarding career theories and to use that information plus your own
experience to determine ways in which career development theories help you in your
work with your students or clients.

In reflecting upon career development theories, Richardson (1993) states that “the
theoretical and research literature in vocational psychology career development is notably
oriented toward the White middle class. Moreover, there is almost no acknowledgement
that poor and lower class populations, regardless of race or ethnicity, are almost totally
absent from the literature” {p. 426). Tinsley (1994) counters that a substantial body of
research over the years has not provided support for sex or economic-level differences.
Tinsley expresses concern that “there is a tendency to dismiss general models that have
applicability to both sexes and all economic class levels as limited in applicability only to
White, middle-class men” (p. 109), These varying views, offered by leading scholars in the
field, require serious consideration and thoughtful reflection. Most would agree, however,
that the need for expanding our understanding of the career development experiences of
persons of color, women, sexual minorities, persons with disabilities, and the less affluent
members of our society remains an important task for the field. Thus, we encourage you
to consider the following questions as you read the theories presented in Chapters 2 and 3:

1. How well do the theories describe the career development process for members
of diverse groups?

2. How well do the theories describe the career development process in general?

3. How well do the theories describe the factors involved in making a career
choice?

. How well do the theories inform the practice of career counseling?

. To what degree is there empirical support for the theories?

. What gaps can you identify within the theories presented?

Dns

Because no one theory is likely to “do it all,” we think it is important to identify the
strengths and limitations of each theory. Doing so will allow you to draw upon the best
the field has to offer. For those interested in career development research, identifying
the gaps will also provide useful information for potentially fruitful research pursuits.

There are many ways to present career theories, Often, theories are presented in
chronological order, beginning with the work of Frank Parsons and proceeding to the
most recent theories. Other times they are grouped by categories (e.g, psychological,
developmental, trait-factor; objective vs. subjective). In determining how to organize
the career theories, we attempted to present them in a fashion that we thought made
sense as practitioners,



--- chapter2/4.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND ApptvIG THEORIES OF Careee Development = 45

The work of Parsons and later trait-factor theorists was discussed in the previous
chapter, largely because these models are intimately intertwined with the historical
roots of career development interventions. The work of contributors such as Parsons,
Williamson, and Dawis and Lofquist highlights the importance of considering the in-
teractions between the person’s traits and factors in the work environment in career
decision making. Building upon our discussion of Parsons’ model and trait-factor
approaches (e.g., TWA) presented in Chapter 1, we begin the current chapter with
Donald Super’s theory for several reasons. First, Super’s theory provides a useful
framework for conceptualizing career development over the life span. His theory also
acknowledges the various personal (e.g., needs, values, abilities) and situational (e.g.,
peer groups, family, labor market) determinants that influence career development.
Super’s theory places work within the context of multiple roles played in life. Finally,
his theory addresses helping people to clarify, articulate, and implement their life-
role self-concepts. Thus, Super’s theory provides a useful, overarching framework for
viewing career development processes.

To expand on the influence of personal and situational influences on career
development, we briefly discuss Anne Roe’s career theory and then describe Linda
Gottfredson’s theory. Roe’s theory points to the importance of early life experiences
in career development. Gottfredson’s theory addresses the fact that sex-role stereo-
typing influences the career aspirations of men and women (Gottfredson, 1996,
2002). Her theory offers a developmental and sociological perspective of career
development. The theory is focused primarily on the career development process as
it relates to the types of compromises people make in formulating their occupational
aspirations.

We then discuss Holland’s theory, which has generated more research than any
other career theory. Arguably, Holland's typology provides the most useful frame-
work for understanding and predicting individual behavior (i.e., job satisfaction, job
performance, and occupational stability) within work environments. Through the use
of assessment instruments, Holland applies his typology to help individuals clarify and
implement their vocational identities (Spokane, Luchetta, & Richwine, 2002).

There are times, however, when “faulty” or irrational thinking impedes individu-
als in their career development, The cumulative effect of a variety of learning experi-
ences can result in varying degrees of functionality among individuals with regard to
their ability to make effective career decisions, For example, when individuals receive
adequate support and are exposed to effective role models, they often develop inter-
ests and skills leading to satisfying career options. Conversely, when such support is
lacking or individuals are misinformed, they often disregard appropriate options be-
cause they lack confidence or they adhere to beliefs (e.g., “I must decide now what I
will do for the rest of my life”) that keep them “stuck” in their career development. In
the latter cases, individuals need assistance in developing beliefs that are more useful
in making effective career decisions. In these instances, the work of John Krumboltz
provides a useful framework for helping practitioners to foster career development
in their clients. We discuss this theory in the final section of this chapter. In Chapter 3,
we focus attention on emerging theories of career development that hold promise
for providing effective descriptions of career development processes and practices.
Table 2.1 summarizes the theories discussed in Chapters 2 and 3.



--- chapter2/5.jpg ---

4B

y8iy

MO]

4B

MO}

ayorepoyy

MO}

sysoydwiy joanynoyjnyy

alolapoy

ayOu0poyy

41H

MO}

Moy

yy

aypispoyy
Hoddng yainesay

jopow orcs
s}008 Jouosiag
sucHDpadKa SUIOOINC,
ADDO YOYES

aoupjsuaddoy pauuniy
SuO}HID ‘syNys YooOddo yso]

pee
soustedxe Bujus0s]

Auap! jouoypo0,,

uouduosuinouTy

PAST/PIPL

S@IYDIDIOIY SPaoRy
sesuayadxe pooupyy AyD]
Ayygeidopo sec10>)
Aunious 309407)

sdeouos jeg

aonds of]

S480} juauojeAap 188107)
se8p)s 186107)

upds 847),

aouepuodsei07)
JUSUUOSAUa UD-ULUOSIOg
SSOUBOPOYSHOS

juaudojeasp
8310y> 188109
anyuBoo [oI00g

Juaudojeaap
@010yp J281DD,
Bulusoa] jorsog

BDOYD 188207)
JOP} IOI]
juaudojanep
[2210U9 188509)
jpoiBojo~nes
/|lusucdojanag

2ywioukpoyaksy
/Roeu] Aljpuosiag

jeuouidojanag

uouljsnipo /aa10y9
J90107)
JO|OO} ION,

wOUDIUSHE

HEYPOH |!)
UMOIG UBARIS
“quay Weqoy

zyoquagy uyof

Pun|oH uyof

uospaypocy
Dpun

aoy auuy

4edng pjouog

inbjoy py]

swmoq suey
