Low scores on CDI scales indicate deficiencies that must be remediated prior
to proceeding with career decision making. For example, a low CDI score suggests
that the client is not aware of the need to make a career choice and is not involved


--- chapter2/16.jpg ---

UINDERSTANDING AND ApptyinG THEORIES OF Career Development 57

in planning for the future. Low scores related to occupational information indicate
the need to become more aware of occupational requirements and tasks. Using the
CDI with Juanita will help identify specific areas in which she may need assistance in
becoming ready to make career decisions (i.e., in developing career maturity).

The next step in applying the C-DAC model involves determining the priority
clients attach to the life roles they play. This step in the C-DAC model distinguishes
Super’s approach from most other career counseling models because it helps clients
understand how they “structure the basic roles of work, play, friendship, and family
into a life” (Savickas, 1993, p. 211).

Achieving this understanding involves exploring the importance, or salience, cli-
ents attach to their life roles. It also means realizing that the problems clients present
in career counseling cannot be precisely categorized as reflecting either “personal”
or “career” concerns, Because few issues are more personal than those related to
career choice and adjustment, it is not surprising that career and noncareer concerns
overlap substantially (Betz & Corning, 1993; Krumboltz, 1993; Subich, 1993; Super,
1993). Research supports this perspective by indicating that clients seeking career
counseling often experience high levels of psychological stress and discuss concerns
related to nonwork roles throughout the duration of the career counseling process
(Anderson & Niles, 1995; Lucas, 1993; Niles & Anderson, 1993). Such findings
point to the importance of attending to the emotional issues clients encounter as they
cope with problems emerging in the context of their unique life structures.

Counselors can encourage clients to examine the personal meaning they attach
to the life roles they play by asking questions such as: How do you spend your time
during a typical week? How important are the different roles of life to you? What
do you like about participating in each of the life roles you play? What life roles do
you think will be important to you in the future? What do you hope to accomplish
in each of the life roles that will be important to you in the future? What life roles
do members of your family play? What do your family members expect you to ac-
complish in each of the life roles? What helpful (and not so helpful) lessons have you
learned about playing each life role? Questions such as these would be important to
discuss with Juanita to help her consider what life roles will be important to her in the
future and what she can do in the present to begin preparing for those life roles. Ask-
ing clients to describe how they spend their time in the course of a typical week and
then to consider the values reflected in their weekly activities is also a useful strategy
for inviting clients to consider life-structure issues in career counseling. Counselors
can also encourage clients to describe how they would like to spend their time at
some future point (e.g., five years in the future), The counselor can then encourage
the client to engage in planning by identifying specific steategies for increasing the
probability that the future life-steucture scenario will occur.

Counselors can also use the Salience Inventory (Super & Nevill, 1986) as a start-
ing point for discussing life-role salience. The Salience Inventory measures the rela-
tive importance of five life roles (student, worker, citizen, homemaker, and leisurite)
on three dimensions, one behavioral and two affective. The behavioral component,
Participation, assesses what the individual does or has done recently in each of the
life roles. The first affective component, Commitment, requires the inventory-taker
to indicate how he or she feels about each of the five life roles. The second affective



--- chapter2/17.jpg ---

58

Crarter 2

component, Values Expectations, requires the respondent to indicate the degree to
which there will be opportunities now or in the future to express important values
in each of the life roles.

Finally, life-role activities can be examined using the “Pie of Life” exercises. In
the Pie of Life activity, clients divide a circle into “slices” reflecting the amount of
time they spend in various life activities during the course of a typical week, They are
then asked to identify the values that they think are reflected in their life pie. After
listing the values, the counselor and client then discuss how the client feels about
the values exposed in the slices of pie. The counselor focuses on reinforcing the time
spent in activities that the client feels good about and explores changes the client can
make in Pie of Life slices that do not reflect the client’s value structure. The counselor
and client can also discuss what the client would like to accomplish in each of the life
roles that are important to the client. They can then focus on what the client needs to
do to increase the chances of accomplishing the life-role goals identified.

To further guide the self-concept crystallization process, career counselors can
use the Values Scale (VS) (Nevill & Super, 1986). The VS measures 21 intrinsic (e.g.,
creativity, altruism) and extrinsic (¢.g., economic rewards) values individuals hope
to express in their life roles. Counselors can use the results of the VS to help clients
focus their exploration on life roles and occupational options, Thus, the VS can be
a useful supplement to measures of interests and abilities for clients attempting to
crystallize work and life goals.

‘With the information provided by the Salience Inventory and the Values Scale,
counselors help clients identify the life roles in which they are currently spending
most of their time, those to which they are emotionally committed, the values they
hope to express in their life roles, and the life roles they expect to be important to
them in the future.

With regard to the latter, counselors can help clients construct strategies for
preparing for their salient life roles. For example, if the life role of worker is one that
Juanita expects to be salient in her future, she can discuss ways to plan and prepare
for that role. She can identify present activities that can help her develop her readi-
ness for the role of worker. Special attention can be given to helping Juanita make
connections between her current life role as a student and her future as a worker.
Information from the Salience Inventory can also be used to encourage Juanita to
think proactively about areas of potential role conflict and discuss strategies for cop-
ing with excessive demands from multiple life roles.

Contextual Factors Influencing Life-Role Salience

Super’s Archway model suggests that life-role self-concepts are shaped by our con-
texts (ie., personal and situational determinants). However, many individuals lack
an awareness of the ways in which contextual factors (e.g., the dominant culture,
culture of origin) interact with identity development to shape life-role salience
(Blustein, 1994).

DOMINANT CULTURE. Often persons simply “inherit” patterns of life-role salience
that are passed on from the dominant or popular culture. Such inheritances can be


--- chapter2/18.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND ApplyinG THECRIes OF Career Deverorment 59

problematic when they are embedded in beliefs based on gender, racial, and other
stereotypes. For example, researchers have consistently found gender bias in life-
role salience and occupational sex-role stereotyping in portrayals of workers in the
popular culture. With regard to the former, Niles and Goodnough (1996) reported
in a literature review that researchers have consistently found gender differences
in role salience that coincide with traditional sex-role expectations (e.g., women
participating more in home and family and expecting more from this life cole than
men). Women who have high salience for the worker role are placed at an obvious
disadvantage in the workforce by such traditional expectations. Also, men limit their
opportunities for participating in the home and family when they adhere to tradi-
tional expectations for life-role salience. Concerning sex-role stereotyping, Coltrane
and Adams (1997) found that women are typically portrayed in popular culture as
unemployed or employed in service or clerical occupations, thus perpetuating gender
inequality in the workplace. Raising client awareness regarding the influence of the
dominant culture on patterns of life-role salience helps clients minimize the influence
of racist beliefs and sexist attitudes on their career decision making.

CULTURE OF ORIGIN. Discussions related to the influence of the dominant culture
on life-role salience can also lead to discussions focusing on how clients’ cultural
backgrounds influence their career development. Counselors and clients can explore
how cultures of origin influence the values expressed in life roles (e.g., seeking to
express self-actualization in work for the individual from a Eurocentric cultural
background or seeking to express cultural identity in work for the individual from
an Asian background}, When these discussions occur in small groups, they stimulate
increased awareness of, and sensitivity to, cultural diversity in life-role salience.

This type of exploration can also lead to exploring the various cultural prescrip-
tions {e.g., Eurocentric men are expected to be “good providers” and upwardly
mobile in their occupations) that are generally assigned to specific life roles. In these
discussions, counselors can encourage clients to identify how they perceive and in-
terpret the role expectations emanating from their cultures of origin and how these
expectations influence their decisions as to whether a particular life role is important.
Special attention can be paid to exploring how these expectations influence the cli-
ent’s understanding of the behaviors required for effective role performance (e.g.,
men who define their parenting role primarily as being a good provider can consider
whether this behavior is sufficient for good parenting).

One specific activity for discussing these topics is suggested by Borodovsky and
Ponterotto (1994). They have found the family genogram to be a usefut tool for
exploring the interaction between family background, cultural prescriptions, and
career planning. The genogram provides a tool for tracking career decisions across
generations and identifying sources of important career beliefs and life themes that
people have acquired.

‘This technique can be expanded to address the same topics for other life roles,
That is, by using the genogram, counselors can encourage clients to identify the
beliefs and life themes pertaining to specific life roles (e.g., parent, and citizen) that
they have acquired from members of their immediate and extended families. Coun-
selors can also use the information provided by clients to contrast the influences on


--- chapter2/19.jpg ---

60

Cuarrer 2

life-role salience emanating from group-oriented cultures with influences from more
individualistic cultures. Terms such as “cultural assimilation” and “cultural accom-
modation” can be introduced in these discussions. The effects of sex-role stereotyp-
ing on life-role salience can also be examined in these discussions. The goal of these
interventions is to increase client awareness as to the factors influencing their beliefs
about the primary roles of life so they can make informed decisions about their future
life-role participation.

Although examining life-role participation more holistically is very important,
the central concern in career development interventions continues to be helping cli-
ents clarify their occupational self-concepts. In the C-DAC model, clients use their
understanding of life-role salience as a foundation on which to build as they move
forward with clarifying and articulating their vocational identities.

Vocational identities are clarified using two methods: the actuarial method
{Super, 1954, 1957) and the developmental method (Super, 1954, 1961}. The
actuarial method relates to the trait-and-factor approach of using test scores to
predict future occupational performance and satisfaction. For instance, Juanita
might be given an interest inventory, such as the Strong Interest Inventory (SII)
(Harmon, Hansen, Borgen, & Hammer, 1994), to compare her interests with those
of people already employed in various occupations. Using the actuarial method, the
counselor “acts like an actuary, consults tables, graphs, and formulas seeking the
optimal prediction, in probability terms, based on the observed correlations with
similar performances of other people” (Jepsen, 1994, p. 45). Juanita’s pattern of
interests would be related to the patterns of workers within a variety of occupa-
tions. The counselor would focus on similar patterns {as starting points for further
exploration) and dissimilar patterns (to identify types of occupations Juanita is
not likely to find satisfying). Ability tests could be used in the same way. Juanita’s
abilities can be compared with the abilities required for successful performance in
specific occupations. Occupations for which her interests and abilities merge to
predict satisfying and successful performance can be identified and focused on for
further consideration,

Values inventory results or values card sorts can then be used to guide further
exploration. Some occupations might be appropriate for a client’s interests and
abilities, but they may not provide sufficient opportunities for values expression. For.
clients like Juanita who are attempting to crystallize occupational preferences, values
inventories or values card sorts may be especially helpful supplements to results from
measures of interests and abilities (Super et al., 1996).

Using the developmental method (which Super also described as the Thematic-
Extrapolation Method), counselors act more like historians (rather than actuaries)
by inviting clients to construct autobiographical stories of development. Specifically,
clients construct chronologies of what they did in the past. These life histories are
then examined for recurrent themes or “threads of continuity” that are used to
“make sense of the past, explain the present, and draw a blueprint for the future”
(Super et al., 1996, p. 157). Whereas the actuarial method is based on traits (e.g.,
How do my traits compare with the traits of others? In what occupations do my
traits predict success?), the developmental method is based on life patterns (e.g.,
What patterns are revealed in my life history? Which of these patterns and themes


--- chapter2/20.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND ApplyING THEORIES OF Career Development 61

are important to incorporate in my future planning?). Jepsen (1994) has noted that
the developmental or thematic-extrapolation method contains three distinct steps:

1. Analyze past behavior and development for recurring themes and underlying
trends.

2. Summarize each theme and trend, taking into account the other themes and
trends.

3. Project the modified themes and trends into the future by extrapolation. (p. 45)

Encouraging the client to consider his or her life as if it were a book and then
asking the client to identify the “chapters of his or her life” is a strategy for identify-
ing recurring life themes and underlying trends. The future can then be described as
“chapters that must be lived for the client to feel as if his or her life is complete” and
the focus can shift toward identifying future goals and aspirations.

The actuarial and developmental methods can be incorporated into careet coun-
seling by using Supec’s (1957) cyclical model of nondirective and directive methods.
Super noted that: “Since vocational development consists of implementing a self-
concept, and since self-concepts often need modification before they can be imple-
mented, it is important that the student, client, or patient put his [sic] self-concept
into words early in the counseling process. The client needs to do this for himself, to
clarify his actual role and his role aspirations; he needs to do it for the counselor, so
that the counselor may understand the nature of the vocational problem confronting
him” (p. 308). Specifically, Super (1957) described the cycles of career counseling
as follows:

1. Nondirective problem exploration and self-concept portrayal (i.e., the client tells
his or her story)

2. Directive topic setting, for further exploring (i.e., the counselor and client clarify
the career concerns and identify which concerns will be the initial focus of career
counseling)

3. Nondirective reflection and clarification of feeling for self-acceptance and insight
(i.e., the career counselor uses empathic responding and basic counseling skills to
help the client clarify his or her situation, feclings, and thoughts)

4. Directive exploration for factual data from tests, occupational pamphlets, extra-

curricular experiences, grades, and so forth, for reality testing (i.e., the counselor

and client collect relevant information regarding the client’s characteristics and
potential occupational options; they also identify options for reality testing or

“trying out” potential options via job shadowing, occupational information

interviewing, voluntecring, and externships)

Nondirective exploration and working through of attitudes and feelings aroused

by reality testing (i.e., the client tries out potential options and then reflects upon

the experiences with the counselor, focusing on the client’s thoughts and feelings
and how the experience may inform the client in terms of next steps)

6. Nondirective consideration of possible actions, for help in decision making (i.c.,
the client identifies what she or he will do next to move forward in her or his
career development}. (p. 308)

w

Essentially, che career counseling model articulated by Super emphasizes helping
clients to clarify and articulate their self-concepts and then move toward implement-
ing their self-concepts in appropriate life-role activity. Specific career counseling


--- chapter2/21.jpg ---

62

Cxarrer 2

interventions, such as the C-DAC model and the thematic extrapolation method, can
be incorporated into Super’s cyclical model {most likely at steps 3-6).

Evaluating Super’s Theory

Super’s theory continues to stimulate career development research. For example,
Lewis, Savickas, and Jones (1996) used the Career Development Inventory (Super,
Thompson, Lindeman, Jordaan, & Myers, 1981) to predict success in medical
school. Their results supported Super’s (1981) contention that having a future ori-
entation and being planful are important ingredients for achieving career maturity
and career adaptability.

Reviewing literature pertaining to Super’s Work Importance Study led Niles and
Goodnough (1996) to three conclusions. First, life-role salience and values must be
viewed within specific developmental and cultural contexts. Second, in diverse set-
tings, and with different groups, there are sex differences related to the relative im-
