portance of life roles and values. And, third, in order to facilitate their clients’ career
development, counselors must attend to life-role salience and values issues in career
counseling (see also Parasuraman, Purhoit, Godshalk, & Beutell, 1996).

Salomone (1996) provided a historical perspective by tracing the evolution of
three key segments of Super’s theory over a 40-year period: (a) theoretical proposi-
tions, (b) conceptualization of the career stages, and (c) definition of career. Salomone’s
review led him to several conclusions. First, Super’s theoretical propositions have not
changed substantially in 40 years. Second, there is the need for more research related
to Super’s propositions and career stage model. Finally, Salomone noted that Super’s
contributions represent an unparalleled legacy in developmental career theory. Ad-
ditionally, Super’s theory segments provide a useful framework for helping clients
clarify their life-role identities and the values they seek to express in their life roles.
Moreover, Super’s theory provides a useful framework for researchers investigating
the process of life-role identity development.

A number of journal articles provide examples of the systematic application of
the C-DAC assessment instrument. For example, articles by Nevill and Kruse (1996)
(Values Scale), Nevill and Calvert (1996) (Salience Inventory), Savickas and Hartung
(1996) (Career Development Inventory), and Cairo, Kritis, and Myers (1996) (Adult
Career Concerns Inventory) provide useful fiterature reviews, test descriptions, and
information concerning the practical application of each assessment in career coun-
seling practice. Hartung et al. (1998) describe strategies for appraising the client’s
cultural identity in the initial stages of the C-DAC model and offer techniques for
considering cultural factors throughout the C-DAC process, thereby making the
model more applicable to clients representing diverse contexts.

Commenting on Super’s theory and the research it has generated, Osipow and
Fitzgerald (1996) noted that Super’s theory “has the virtue of building upon aspects
of the mainstream of developmental psychology and personality theory and has
considerable utility for practice and research” (p. 143). They also noted that “most
of the research reported on Super’s theory generally supports his model” (p. 143).
Borgen (1991) noted that Super’s theory “has splendidly stood the test of time”
(p. 278). Brown (1996) pointed out that Super’s theory “will forever be the segmental



--- chapter2/22.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND APPLYING THEORIES OF Career Devetorment 63.

legacy of a brilliant thinker” (p. 522}. The development of the C-DAC model should
provide stronger links between Super’s theory and career development intervention
@ research.

ANNE ROE’S PERSONALITY THEORY OF CAREER CHOICE

Anne Roe (1904-1991), a clinical psychologist, initially became interested in career
behavior through her research investigating personality factors related to artists’
expression of creativity. Roe subsequently expanded her research to eminent scien-
tists. From these investigations, Roe (1956, 1957) suggested that early childhood
experiences influence career behavior. As Brown, Lum, and Voyle (1997) emphasize,
however, from Roe’s perspective the relationship between early childhood experi-
ences and subsequent career behavior is mediated by the “structure of psychological
needs that develop due to the pattern of frustrations and satisfactions experienced in
childhood” (p. 284). Specifically, the resultant need structure orients persons either
toward people or not toward people. Drawing upon Maslow’s (1954) needs theory,
Roe contended that needs not satisfied become important motivators in the occupa-
tional choices people make.

The child-rearing environments to which children are exposed shape early
childhood experiences, Roe identified three primary modes of child rearing or envi-
ronments to which children are exposed: emotional concentration, avoidance, and
acceptance. Emotional concentration on the child ranges from overprotection to
overly demanding behaviors. While physical needs are met, psychological needs may
be withheld as parents place conditions on their love and approval. Children exposed
to overly protective environments learn that conforming elicits rewards and, thus, a
dependence on others for approval and a positive sense of self-esteem is developed.
Overly demanding environments result in the development of perfectionist tenden-

r cies as children learn to adhere to “all-or-nothing” standards. Avoidance of the child,
according to Roe, ranges from neglecting the child’s physical needs to rejecting the
child’s emotional needs. Acceptance of the child involves environments in which the
child’s physical and psychological needs are met. Independence and self-reliance are
encouraged in either an unconcerned, noninvolved way or an active, supportive one.

Each of these climates affects the satisfaction of the child’s needs, which, in turn,
subsequently influences the adult’s choice of occupational field. For example, adults
working in service occupations are oriented toward people and thus were likely
exposed to loving, overprotective early childhood environments, Adults in more
scientific occupational fields are typically not oriented toward people and therefore
were most likely exposed to rejecting and avoidant early childhood environments.

Roe developed an occupational classification system that contains eight fields
based on arts and entertainment, and general culture. Service fields are generally
more people-oriented occupations such as teaching, counseling, and social work.
Business contact occupations involve interpersonal interactions of a persuasive
nature, such as sales, Organizational occupations emphasize systems and manage-
ment. Technology involves occupations such as engineering. Outdoor occupations
focus on the application of scientific principles in outdoor occupations such as for-
est management. Science includes occupations such as chemist and physicist. Arts


--- chapter2/23.jpg ---

64 CHapter 2

and entertainment involves occupations related to acting, musical performance, and
painting. General culture involves occupations that perpetuate the civilization such,
as government occupations. People choose occupational fields based on their need!
structures, which were influenced by the childhood environments that they expe-
rienced, The level of one’s occupation is influenced by factors such as the person’s
genetic structure and socioeconomic background.

Evaluating Roe’s Theory

Largely due to the retrospective nature of Roe’s theory, researchers have been chal-
lenged in their attempts to validate the theory’s assumptions. Variability in a par-
ent’s parental style, variability in each parent’s respective parenting style, variability
in the early life environments experienced by members of the same occupation, and
the inherent challenge in attempting to predict events that are distant in time from
their causal influences have all resulted in little empirical support for Roe’s theory.
When this fact is combined with the reality that Roe’s theory focuses on explaining
factors underlying career choice and does not offer much relative to career interven-
tions, then it is not hard to understand why this theory has largely faded from the
current career development literature. Roe’s theory does, however, point to the role
of parents and the influence of a person’s needs structure in the career development
process.

LINDA GOTTFREDSON’S THEORY OF CIRCUMSCRIPTION,
COMPROMISE, AND SELF-CREATION

One theory that describes the process leading to the formulation of occupational
aspirations in childhood and adolescence is Gottfredson’s theory of circumscription,
compromise, and self-creation (Gottfredson, 2002, 2005). Gottfredson developed,
her theory, in part, to,address the following question: “Why do children seem to re-
create the social inequalities of their elders long before they themselves experience
any barriers to pursuing their dreams?” (Gottfredson, 2002, p. 85). She addresses
the compromises that people make in their career aspirations, particularly as these
compromises relate to sex-typed learning and experiences, Specifically, compromise
involves the process of modifying career choices due to limiting factors, such as
prestige, sex type, and field of interest (Gottfredson, 1981). Gottfredson’s theory
emphasizes the view that “career choice is an attempt to place oneself in the broader
social order” (1996, p, 181}. Thus, she offers a developmental and sociological per-
spective of career development.

Gottfredson (2002) notes that people distinguish occupations according to
the dimensions of: “masculinity-femininity, occupational prestige, and field of
work” (p. 88). Gottfredson (2005) further suggests that occupational prestige
is positively correlated with the degree of intellectual capacity required for
job performance. The person’s self-concept interacts with the person’s occu-
pational stereotypes when making decisions about the perceived compatibility
of different occupations. Compatibility, or the suitability of any occupation, is
determined when the individual considers factors such as the perceived gender


--- chapter2/24.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND AppivinG THEORES OF Career Deverorment 65

appropriateness (most important), prestige (second in importance), and, finally,
the degree to which the occupation will fulfill the person’s preferences and per-
sonality needs (last in importance within the compromise process). The “zone of
acceptable occupational alternatives” or “social space” (2002, p. 91) represents
the person’s conclusions as to his or her fit in society. Gottfredson contends
that people compromise in their search process because they typically search for
an occupational choice that is “good enough,” but not necessarily the best pos-
sible choice. This is because the best possible choice requires substantially more
intensive information gathering related to factors such as values clarification and
determining the accessibility of various occupational alternatives than what is re-
quired for a choice that is “good enough,” People become indecisive when they
perceive the options within their social space as undesirable. Occupational satis-
faction hinges on the degree to which “the compromise allows one to implement
a desired social self, either through the work itself or the lifestyle it allows self and
family” (2002, p. 107).

Circumscription involves the process of eliminating unacceptable occupational
alternatives based primarily on gender and prestige. Circumscription highlights the
fact that young people begin eliminating occupational options from consideration
“as soon as they are able to perceive essential distinctions among people and lives”
(Gottfredson, 2002, p. 131). The circumscription process is guided by five prin-
ciples (2002, pp. 94-95). The first principle notes that circumscription is guided by
the growing capacity of children to understand and organize complex information
about themselves and the world. Children move from magical to abstract thinking
as they develop. The second principle reflects the belief that because occupational
aspirations are inextricably linked with one’s sense of self, occupational prefer-
ences reflect attempts to both implement and enhance one’s self-concept. The third
principle underlying the circumscription process is that children begin to grapple
with more complex distinctions among people (e.g., perceptions related to prestige)
while they are still in the process of integrating more concrete phenomena (e.g.,
sex roles) into their self-conceptions. The fourth circumscription principle empha-
sizes the belief that children progressively eliminate occupational options as their
self-conceptions increase in complexity and clarity. At the same time, Gottfredson
notes that “people reconsider options they have ruled out as unacceptable in sex-
type and prestige only when they are prompted to do so by some formative new
experience or some notable change in their social environment” (2002, p. 95).
Finally, the circumscription process is gradual and typically not immediately obvi-
ous despite its strong effect on the individual. These principles operate throughout
the stages of cognitive development Gottfredson (1996} delineated to describe the
circumscription process.

Stage One: Orientation to Size and Power

The first stage occurs between the ages of 3 and 5 and reflects the onset of object
constancy in cognitive development. At this stage, children classify people in simple
terms, such as big versus little. Thus, children orient themselves to the size difference
between themselves and adults.


--- chapter2/25.jpg ---

66

CHAPTER 2

Stage Two: Orientation to Sex Roles

This stage occurs between the ages of 6 and 8. During this stage, children become
aware of different sex roles between men and women. They think dichotomously
(e.g., good-bad, rich-poor) and interpret sex-role stereotypes as behavioral impera-
tives. Their occupational aspirations also reflect this concern for behaving in ways
that are appropriate for one’s sex (e.g., certain jobs are for boys and certain jobs are
for girls). Thus, it is during this stage that children develop their “tolerable-sextype
boundary” (Gottfredson, 2005).

Stage Three: Orientation to Social Valuation

During this stage, which occurs between the ages of 9 and 13, children are able to
think more abstractly and they become aware of social class and prestige. Occupa-
tions that are not in line with their perceived ability levels and that do not meet with
the approval of their social reference group are no longer considered. The elements
of social class and ability determine the “tolerable-level boundary,” which represents
the lower limit of occupations children in this stage are willing to consider (i.e.,
which occupations are “beneath” them and, therefore, not worthy of their consider-
ation). Children also establish a “tolerable-effort level” based on the upper limit of
effort children are willing to exert and the risks children are willing to take in pur-
suing occupational options (i.e., those occupational goals that are not beyond their
ability to achieve). Together, these levels determine the zone of occupations children
consider as acceptable (Gottfredson, 1996).

Stage Four: Orientation to the Internal, Unique Self

This stage occurs from age 14 to beyond. During this stage, adolescents become
more introspective and self-aware. Now able to engage in more abstract thinking
than in previous stages, adolescents begin identifying internally generated goals
and self-concepts. As Gottfredson notes, “vocational development erupts into con-
scious awareness during Stage 4” (2005, p. 81). Adolescents engage in exploring
occupational options that are congruent with their emerging sense of self. Thus,
this stage represents a shift from the previous stages in that the emphasis turns from
eliminating unacceptable options to identifying options that are most preferred and
acceptable. It is also during this stage that the process of compromise is introduced.
Compromise involves being forced to choose among minimally acceptable occupa-
tional options. Specifically, compromise occurs as preferred occupational options are
eliminated from further consideration due to factors such as the perceived accessibil-
ity of any occupational option. Compromise can be anticipatory (i.¢., prior to actual
encounters with external barriers) or experiential (i.e., after encountering an external
barrier to a preferred option).

Applying Gottfredson’s Theory to Practice

Gottfredson (1996) noted that, traditionally, career development interventions
occur during stage four when people are attempting to crystallize and clarify their self-
concepts. However, Gottfredson’s theory highlights the importance of providing career


--- chapter2/26.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND AppivinG THEORIES OF Career DeveloeMent — 67

development interventions, often in the form of career education programs, to young
people in earlier stages of development. Accordingly, career education programs
should focus on exploring the full range of occupational options to promote systematic
exploration in career choice (Gottfredson}. Clearly, interventions that address occu-
pational sex-role stereotypes and that expose children to options across occupational
levels should be cornerstones of such programs. Specifically, Gottfredson posited that
career education programs need to be sensitive to students’ levels of cognitive develop-
ment; they need to expose students to a wide range of career options, and help them
become aware of the circumscription of alternatives and compromise process.

From Gottfredson’s perspective, a major concern to address in individual career
counseling is the degree to which clients have engaged in the unnecessary restriction
of occupational options. “The problem in compromise is the failure to come to grips
with reality, either by ignoring it or failing to deal with it effectively” (Gottfredson,
1996, p. 217). Gottfredson identified criteria to guide counselors atternpting to clarify
the degree to which their clients may have engaged in the unnecessary restriction of
options. For example, she noted that: clients should be able to identify occupational
options and the relevant self-characteristics required to perform those occupations;
clients should not unnecessarily restrict their occupational options; and they should be
aware of obstacles they may encounter in implementing occupational choices.

In examining these criteria with clients, career counselors can explore their cli-
ents’ tolerable level and effort boundaries, perceptions of barriers, and the contextual
factors influencing clients’ perceptions of acceptable career options, Gottfredson ad-
vocates incorporating discussions of ability more explicitly into the career counseling
process. Despite the fact that ability is a strong predictor of career success, it is often
not highlighted in career counseling. Gottfredson (2003) contends that avoiding
the discussion of ability restricts the usefulness of career counseling. When ability
is integrated into the career counseling experience for adolescents, it can also help
them to see the importance of school performance and career achievement, thereby
increasing their academic motivation and engagement.

Applying Gottfredson’s criteria to Juanita’s case, it is important that the coun-
selor explore with her what occupational options she has considered thus far {in
addition to being in a band). It would also be important to build upon Juanita’s
strengths and interests. Understanding her interests in artistic endeavors might be a
good starting point. In discussing these interests, the counselor can assess whether
Juanita has unnecessarily restricted her options. Her counselor can also address ques-
tions such as: Is her ability sufficient for a performance career? Is Juanita aware of the
obstacles likely to be encountered in pursuing this option? Has Juanita considered
additional opportunities for expressing her values, interests, and abilities? What has
caused her to eliminate other occupational options from further consideration? The
counselor can support and challenge Juanita as she becomes increasingly aware of
her emerging sense of self and her attempts to identify congruent options.

Evaluating Gottfredson’s Theory

Research related to Gottfredson’s theory has not been extensive. Moreover, research
activity related to the theory seems to be in decline and existing research results


--- chapter2/27.jpg ---

68

Carter 2

have been equivocal. Much of the research has focused on circumscription related
to social class, gender, and intelligence. For example, using a sample of Canadian
twelfth-grade students, Hannah and Kahn (1989) found that students from higher
social classes held higher aspirations than students from lower social classes. Helwig
(2001) conducted two studies testing the applicability of Gottfredson’s theory to the
career development of children. This longitudinal research followed students from
second to twelfth grades. In the first study, Helwig examined the occupational aspi-
rations of children and found support for Gottfredson’s theory of circumscription
and compromise. Support for Gottfredson’s theory was found in the second study
as well; Helwig reported that students abandoned fantasy occupational ideals in
favor of more realistic occupational aspirations toward the end of their high school
