
sysuooyy

Avoauy 188103
SAK8UBOD |DID0g

Buyesunoz
J98i0Q JO
Aoays Buywoe]

S]ueWUOSAUA
SHO\A Pud
SOyYOUOSIEg
JOUoHDDOA,

uoyDaI yes
pud ‘asiwosdwiory

‘youd yoswun24>,
BD}0Y) 880)
ye Aicayy
Aujouosieg

snods i)
‘PeSeHT

JUsUySNIPY YOM

sausoag] 49aLn fo morning Jog

rzaqa Y



--- chapter2/6.jpg ---

Yb

Bi

4H

ayQepoyy

Si ARR EROS SE SE

aynuapoyy

MO]

MO}

MO}

MO}

aIDIepow

ajpiepow,

s]p}I01] Pud sWaYDg
SUIEHOg
suOpOUNY

SAyoUU eining

aed
wajqoud see107

Bunjow-Bujuooy)

sdajs youoyouny
uoyorardioyy}
poloud 188307)
uoK0 JuIof
peaquory

Aojuenul
Buuuoyd ayy aayosBoquy

‘Ausi@niq]
SSOUP2IDBULOD
aBunyp jorseg

saysn} JOOS

malneiuy a|Aig J8eu05)
Aygoidopy 18105
seweyl aif]
Ayjouosied jouoyooo,,

Alojusauy siyBnouy 10305)
wjowop Burssoooid oayndexy
aio apg Gulsse2cud
UODUNO UE 10 prUDIAY

isypuauiouayd
‘eBupyp pun
uoypziuDGiojjes

SAIDIORY

ISIAHONYSUOD

Aoaypuoloy

{uou|snlpe /ao}oyo
380109 |DNKEIUOD
8180100 Jo
anyzedsiad Q1wou:
puo ‘jouawdo
JOASP "JoUUDaYiG

201049
49a:09 enyuB07)

wySug wif
puo 10Aig uaqoy

uDIYSO7 AUD]

kenoeg BUD,

ulyjo>) Aoupny
“YODA ADIs|PO]
"Bun, pioyaiy

uesuby
Auung °}

SOIDIADS POY
zjU9} jeuDf
‘uOpsDay LEqoy
ifuosdwing sawof
‘uosieiag Aine)

si9alo5
jo Aoay] sopy>

WapoUl|sog

Buiwunjd
ayn enoi69iuy

Aoays
woydny|sSuoT)
Jaan)

yopoiddy
Bulssanoig
woyDUIO}U
aiqyuiBory

47



--- chapter2/7.jpg ---

48

Cuaeter 2

SUPER’S LIFE-SPAN, LIFE-SPACE THEORY
The leading developmental approach is Donald Super’s “life-span, life-space” theory r

(Super, 1990; Super, Savickas, & Super, 1996). The life-span, life-space theory
evolved over a 40-year time period, as Super and his colleagues worked to elabo-
rate and refine the various aspects of the theory (Super et al., 1996), Although
Super’s theory is primarily developmental in nature, he labeled it as a “differential-
developmental-social-phenomenological career theory” (Super, 1969). This label
communicates Super’s efforts at synthesizing and extending extant developmental
and career theories. Super understood that describing a process as complex as careet
development requires synthesizing the work of scholars from various disciplines
(e.g., psychology and sociology). For example, Super synthesized work by Buehler
(1933), Havighurst (1951), Kelly (1955), Miller & Form (1951), and Rogers (1951)
in conceptualizing various aspects of his theory of career development.

Super extended career theories by addressing shortcomings he perceived in the
theories proposed by his predecessors and his contemporaries. For example, Super’s
contemporaries, Ginzberg, Ginsburg, Axelrad, and Herma (1951), proposed a ca-
reer theory asserting that career choice is a developmental process (rather than a
single decision) in which compromises are made between the individual’s wishes and
occupational possibilities. They viewed the developmental process as spanning three
stages: (a) fantasy (birth to age 11), {b) tentative (age 11 to 17), and (c) realistic (age 17
to early twenties). They theorized that four factors (individual values, emotional
factors, the amount and kind of education, and the effect of reality through environ-
mental pressures) converged to shape the individual’s career decisions.

Super argued that the theory proposed by Ginzberg and his associates was defi-
cient in that it (a) did not take into account research related to the role of interests
in career decision making, {b} failed to operationally describe “choice,” (c) made a
sharp distinction between choice and adjustment, and (d) lacked a clear articulation of
the process of compromise as it relates to career choice. Responding to conditions such
as these, Super developed his “differential-developmental-social-phenomenological
career theory.”

Rather than developing a unified theory, however, Super developed his theory
segmentally. In fact, Super noted that in one sense “there is no ‘Super’s theory’; there
is just the assemblage of theories that I have sought to synthesize. In another sense,
the synthesis is a theory” (1990, p. 199). The result is really a “segmental theory”
describing three key aspects of career development: (a) life span, (b) life space, and
(c) self-concept. The theory culminates in an intervention model labeled as the Career
Development Assessment and Counseling (C-DAC) model (Super, Osborne, Walsh,
Brown, & Niles, 1992). We provide an updated version of the C-DAC model in this
chapter. The C-DAC model translates the three theory segments into career practice
to help people articulate their career concerns, examine their life-role salience, and
clarify their self-concepts.

Life-span, life-space theory builds upon key assumptions proposed by Super
(1953, 1933, 1990; Super & Bachrach, 1957}. These assumptions contend that
people differ in their important self-characteristics and self-concepts; that their
respective self-characteristics make them eligible for a number of occupations; that


--- chapter2/8.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND APplYING THEORIES OF Career Devetopment 49

each occupation requires specific worker traits but that these requirements are flex-
ible enough to allow for a variety of persons within specific occupations; and that
self-concepts evolve over time, making choice and adjustment continuous processes
for everyone. Further assumptions are that the change process for each person can
be described by specific life stages (growth, exploration, establishment, maintenance,
and decline or disengagement); that a person’s occupational level and career pattern
are influenced by contextual (e.g., family, socioeconomic status, educational oppor-
tunities, community) and personal (e.g., skills, personality, needs, values, interests)
factors; and that people’s readiness to cope with the career development tasks (career
maturity) they encounter is influenced by the their degree of success in coping with
previous tasks encountered in earlier stages of career development.

The life-span, life-space theory also builds on other factors, such as the notion
that a person’s career development can be facilitated by providing developmentally
appropriate career interventions across the life span; career choice involves develop-
ing and implementing one’s self-concepts and reflects a synthesizing and compromis-
ing process as the person develops and interacts with, as well as learns from, his or
her environment; that life satisfaction is dependent upon finding life-role opportuni-
ties that are consistent with a person’s important self-characteristics; and that it is
important for each person to structure life-role involvements that reflect his or her
preferences, values, and life-role self-concepts.

The propositions incorporate statements from diverse theoretical perspectives
(e.g., trait-and-factor, developmental, social learning, and psychodynamic), thus
supporting Super’s contention that his theory is more than a developmental one.
Super’s propositions also introduce some relatively novel concepts into the career
development literature. Specifically, Super expanded career development concepts
by encouraging the field to consider the notion that there is intraoccupational vari-
ability among workers, that multiple life-role development is important to consider
in career development, and that self-concepts evolve over time, making choice and
adjustment a continuous process. Thus, when Super’s propositions are placed in his-
torical context, they provide the impetus for shifting the paradigm within the field
from one that focuses on “vocation” to one that focuses on “career”; from one that
focuses exclusively on the content of career choice to one that highlights the process
of career development over the life span.

Life Span

Although career development, like physical development, is a lifelong process, it is
unlike physical development in that career development is not ontogenetic. Rather,
careers develop within the context of psychosocial development and societal expec-
tations and against the backdrop of the occupational opportunity structure. Early
in life, career development is relatively homogeneous and age related. Most young
people are enrolled in educational institutions that require them to make decisions at
specific grade levels (e.g,, students in eighth grade must select a curriculum of study
for high school, students leaving high school must make choices about what they
will do when their secondary-school experience ends). Thus, in childhood and ado-
lescence the term career maturity is used in relationship to career decision-making


--- chapter2/9.jpg ---

50

Crapter 2

readiness. Career development in adulthood, however, is heterogeneous and not
as directly connected to age. Adult careers develop in response to the challenges
presented by changing occupational opportunities and evolving patterns of life-role
participation. Thus, adults may recycle through various career development stages
and tasks, depending on their situations in life. Because career development in adult-
hood is heterogeneous, the term career adaptability (rather than career maturity) is
used when referring to an adult person’s career decision-making readiness. The term
career adaptability reflects the fact that “as adults cope with their changing work and
working conditions, adults make an impact on their environments and their environ-
ments make an impact on them” (Niles, Anderson, & Goodnough, 1998, p. 273).
Just as the self-concept evolves over time, making choosing and adjusting continuous
processes, educational and work environments also change over time, making choos-
ing and adjusting continuous requirements. Complacency becomes the enemy of
effective career self-management. In this sense, career adaptability parallels Piaget’s
model of adaptation based on the two processes of assimilation and accommodation.
Career adaptability also supports the view that adults are “responsible agents act-
ing within dynamic environmental settings” to find ways to effectively manage their
career development (Super & Knasel, 1981, p. 199). Others (e.g., Savickas, 2005)
have elaborated upon Super’s use of the career adaptability construct.

Although Super originally applied “adaptability” to adult career development, it
seems reasonable to suggest that the term career adaptability can also be applied to
children and adolescents. Despite their relative homogeneity in career development
when compared with adults, young people experience differences in their readiness
to cope with career development tasks. Some young people encounter environmental
obstacles (e.g., poverty, racism, sexism) that influence their career development in less-
than-positive ways. Some young people are provided with environmental experiences
(e.g., the opportunity to enroll in outstanding schools, opportunities to engage in mul-
tiple recreational and co-curricular school activities) that foster career development.
Differences in contextual “affordances” (Vondracek, Lerner, & Schulenberg, 1986)
have implications for career development. Thus, career adaptability seems a more fit-
ting term for young people than does career maturity. Savickas (1997) agrees and states
that “career adaptability should replace career maturity as the critical construct in the
developmental perspective” (p. 247). We concur with Savickas’ recommendation.

In describing the process of career development over the life span, Super drew on
the research of Buehler (1933), Miller and Form (1951), and Havighurst (1953). Super
conceptualized career as “the life course of a person encountering a series of develop-
mental tasks and attempting to handle them in such a way as to become the kind of
person he or she wants to become” (Super, 1990, pp. 225-226). Super identified the
series of developmental tasks that are typically encountered and related them to stages
and substages of career development. The stages of career development, in their typi-
cal sequence, are growth (childhood), exploration (adolescence), establishment (early
adulthood), maintenance (middle adulthood), and disengagement (late adulthood).

GROWTH. Children ages 4 to 13 are confronted with the career development tasks
of developing a beginning sense of self and a basic understanding of the world-
of-work. In so doing, children progress through the substages of fantasy, interest,


--- chapter2/10.jpg ---

