education. Other researchers applaud Gottfredson’s theoretical emphasis on career
development in childhood and gender differences, noting that the theory fills an im-
portant gap in the career literature (McLennan & Arthur, 1999).

Empirical results from a study focusing on New Zealand students between the
ages of 5 and 14, and conducted by Henderson, Hesketh, and Tuffin (1988), did
not support the importance of gender in Gottfredson’s stage two (Orientation to
Sex Roles). Their findings were supportive of the importance of social class in stage
three (Orientation to Social Valuation), A study conducted by Hesketh, Elmslie, and
Kaldor (1990) suggested an alternative model of compromise in which interests were
more important in career choices than either sex type or prestige, because interests
incorporate the latter. Leong and Plake (1990) found that women, more often than
men, opted for cross-sex work rather than same-sex work if the former provided
them with higher prestige. Blanchard and Lichtenberg (2003) studied Gottfredson’s
compromise process and found that study participants who were engaged in a
moderate or high degree of compromise placed an equal amount of importance on
prestige and sex type, thus differing from what the theory purports. The same study
participants did, however, place a greater importance on prestige and sex type than
they did on interests as they considered factors influencing the compromise process.

More recently, Cochran, Wang, Stevenson, Johnson, and Crews (in press) used
data from a longitudinal sample to investigate the relationship between adolescent
occupational aspirations and mid-life career success using Gottfredson’s theory. The
results of this study lend support for the influence of socioeconomic status (SES) and
ability in the formation of occupational aspirations. Occupational aspirations, abil-
ity, and gender were significantly related to career achievement in later life. These
researchers also found that adolescent girls achieved less career success in mid-life
than adolescent boys.

In evaluating Gottfredson’s theory, Brown (1996) noted “the propositions re-
lating to the factors that lead to circumscription and compromise are too general.
The result is that we are left with questions about what actually occurs in the career
choice and selection process” (p. 523). Nonetheless, Gottfredson’s theory provides
many interesting concepts describing boundaries and motivational dimensions re-
lated to the formation of occupational aspirations (Herr et al., 2004). Her theory
also addresses important gaps within the career-related literature (i.e., career devel-
opment in childhood and gender differences). Moreover, Gottfredson’s (2005) more
recent explication of her theory begins to address Brown’s critique regarding the


--- chapter2/28.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND AprivinG THEORES OF Career DevelormenT 69

need for more specificity related to career development processes. Research studies
testing Gottfredson’s theory using a longitudinal and cross-sectional design would
be particularly useful.

JOHN HOLLAND’S THEORY OF TYPES
AND PERSON-ENVIRONMENT INTERACTIONS

Holland’s (1959, 1966, 1973, 1985a, 1997) theory belongs to a long tradition of
theoretical perspectives seeking to describe individual differences in personality
types (e.g., Murray, 1938; Spranger, 1928), Holland’s theory has been described as
structural-interactive “because it provides an explicit link between various personal-
ity characteristics and corresponding job titles and because it organizes the massive
data about people and jobs” (Weinrach, 1984, p. 63). The theory is based on four
basic assumptions:

1, In our culture, most persons can be categorized as one of six types: realistic,
investigative, artistic, social, enterprising, or conventional.

2. There are six kinds of environments: realistic, investigative, artistic, social, enter-
prising, and conventional.

3. People search for environments that will let them exercise their skills and abili-
ties, express their attitudes and values, and take on agreeable problems and roles.

4. A person’s behavior is determined by an interaction between personality and the
characteristics of the environment, (Holland, 1973, pp. 2-4)

From these assumptions it is clear that a key to understanding and using
Holland’s theory is in understanding his typology. A good starting point for this is
to consider how personality types develop. To a large degree, “types produce types”
(Holland, 1973, p. 11). That is, personality types are both genetically and environ-

r mentally based:

A child’s special heredity and experience first lead to preferences for some kinds of activi-
ties and aversions to others. Later, these preferences become well-defined interests from
which the person gains self-satisfaction as well as reward from others. Still later, the pur-
suit of these interests leads to the development of more specialized competencies as well
as to the neglect of other potential competencies. At the same time, a person’s differentia-
tion of interests with age is accompanied by a crystallization of correlated values. These
events—an increasing differentiation of preferred activities, interests, competencies, and
values—create a characteristic disposition or personality type that is predisposed to ex-
hibit characteristic behavior and to develop characteristic personality traits. (Holland,
1973, p. 12)

Holland contends that, to a large degree, career interests are an expression
of the individual's personality (Holland, 1959, 1966, 1973, 1985a, 1992). As
Spokane (1996) elaborated, “Interests, however, are complex measures that reflect
personality as well as preferences, values, self-efficacy and so on, Types, then, are
complex theoretical groupings based upon personality and interests” (p. 40).
Personality traits are identified by preferences for leisure activities, school subjects,
avocational interests, and work. To varying degrees, each individual resem-
bles one of six basic personality types. The more one resembles any particular



--- chapter2/29.jpg ---

7O Carrer 2

personality type, the more likely it is that the person will manifest the behaviors
and traits associated with that type (Weinrach, 1984). Following is a discussion
of each of the six personality types defined by Holland (1973, pp. 14~18; 1994,

pp. 2-3).
The Realistic Type

The realistic personality type prefers activities that entail the explicit, ordered, or
systematic manipulation of objects, tools, machines, and animals and has an aversion
to educational or therapeutic activities. The realistic person has mechanical abilities
but may lack social skills. Realistic types prefer jobs such as automobile mechanic,
surveyor, farmer, or electrician. Realistic types are often described as:

conforming, humble, normal, frank, materialistic,
persistent, genuine, modest, practical, hardheaded, natural,
shy, honest, and thrifty.

The Investigative Type

The investigative personality type prefers activities that entail the observational,
symbolic, systematic, and creative investigation of physical, biological, and cultural
phenomena in order to understand and control such phenomena. Investigative types
have an aversion to persuasive, social, and repetitive activities. These tendencies
lead to an acquisition of scientific and mathematical competencies and to a deficit in
leadership ability. Investigative types prefer jobs such as biologist, chemist, physicist,
anthropologist, geologist, or medical technologist. Investigative persons are often
described as:

analytical, independent, modest, cautious, intellectual, @
pessimistic, complex, introverted, precise, critical,
methodical, rational, curious, and reserved.

The Artistic Type

The artistic personality type prefers ambiguous, free, unsystematized activities
that entail the manipulation of physical, verbal, or human materials to create art
forms or products. Artistic persons have an aversion to explicit systematic and
ordered activities, These tendencies lead to an acquisition of artistic competen-
cies in language, art, music, drama, and writing and to a deficit in clerical- or
business-system competencies. Artistic types like jobs such as composer, musi-
cian, stage director, writer, interior decorator, or actor/actress, Artistic persons
are often described as:

complicated, imaginative, introspective, disorderly,
impractical, intuitive, emotional, impulsive, nonconforming,
expressive, independent, open, idealistic, and original.


--- chapter2/30.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND AppiviNG THEORIES OF C.

The Social Type

‘The social personality type prefers activities that entail the manipulation of others
to inform, train, develop, cute, or enlighten. They have an aversion to explicit,
ordered, and systematic activities involving materials, tools, or machines. These
tendencies lead to an acquisition of human relations competencies such as inter-
personal and educational competencies and to a deficit in mechanical and scientific
ability. Social types like jobs such as teacher, religious worker, counselor, clinical
psychologist, psychiatric caseworker, or speech therapist. Social persons are often
described as:

convincing, idealistic, social, cooperative, kind,
sympathetic, friendly, patient, tactful, generous,
responsible, understanding, helpful, and warm.

The Enterprising Type

‘The enterprising personality type prefers activities that entail the manipulation of
others to attain organizational or economic gain. They have an aversion to observa-
tional, symbolic, and systematic activities. These tendencies lead to an acquisition of
leadership, interpersonal, and persuasive competencies and to a deficit in scientific
ability. Enterprising types like jobs such as salesperson, manager, business execu-
tive, television producer, sports promoter, or buyer. Enterprising persons are often
described as:

acquisitive, domineering, optimistic, adventurous,
energetic, pleasure-seeking, agreeable, extroverted,
attention-getting, ambitious, impulsive, self-confident,
sociable, and popular.

The Conventional Type

The conventional personality type prefers activities that entail the explicit, or-
dered, and systematic manipulation of data, such as keeping records, filing mate-
rials, reproducing materials, organizing written and numerical data according to
a prescribed plan, and operating computers to attain organizational or economic
goals, Conventional types have an aversion to ambiguous, free, exploratory, or
unsystematized activities. These tendencies lead to an acquisition of clerical,
computational, and business system competencies and to a deficit in artistic
competencies. Conventional types like jobs such as bookkeeper, stenographer,
financial analyst, banker, cost estimator, or tax expert. Conventional persons
are often described as:

conforming, inhibited, persistent, conscientious, obedient,
practical, careful, orderly, thrifty, efficient, and
unimaginative.



--- chapter2/31.jpg ---

72

Cuarrer 2

Holland (1973) used the same six types to describe occupational environments
(pp. 29-33). For example, the realistic environment requires the explicit, ordered,
or systematic manipulation of objects, tools, machines, and animals. It encourages
people to view themselves as having mechanical ability. It rewards people for display-
ing conventional values and encourages them to see the world in simple, tangible,
and traditional terms.

The investigative environment requires the symbolic, systematic, and creative
investigation of physical, biological, or cultural phenomena. It encourages scientific
competencies and achievements and the perception of the world in complex and
unconventional ways. It rewards people for displaying scientific values.

The artistic environment requires participation in ambiguous, free, and unsys-
tematized activities to create art forms or products. It encourages people to view
themselves as having artistic abilities and to see themselves as expressive, noncon-
forming, independent, and intuitive. It rewards people for the display of artistic
values.

The social environment requires participation in activities that inform, train, de-
velop, cure or enlighten others, It requires people to see themselves as liking to help
others, as being understanding of others, and as seeing the world in flexible ways. It
rewards people for the display of social values.

The enterprising environment requires participation in activities that involve the
manipulation of others to attain organizational and self-interest goals. It requires
people to view themselves as aggressive, popular, self-confident, sociable, and as
possessing leadership and speaking ability. It encourages people to view the world
in terms of power and status and in stereotyped and simple terms. It rewards people
for displaying enterprising goals and values.

The conyentional environment requires participation in activities that involve
the explicit, ordered, or systematic manipulation of data, such as record keeping, fil-
ing materials, and organizing written and numerical data according to a prescribed
plan. It requires people to view themselves as conforming, orderly, nonartistic, and
as having clerical competencies. It rewards people for perceiving the world in stereo-
typed and conventional ways.

Congruence

The key construct in Holland’s theory is that of congruence. Congruence describes
the degree of fit between an individual’s personality type and current or prospective
work environment. A person is in a congruent work environment when the person’s
personality type matches the occupational environment (e.g., a social type working
as a counselor). Conversely, incongruence occurs when individuals are in environ-
ments that do not match their personality types (e.g., a social type working as an
auto mechanic), Individuals tend to be more satisfied and perform better in environ-
ments that match (or are congruent with) their personality types. Thus, congruence is
based on the assumption that “birds of a feather flock together” and that “different
types require different environments” (Holland, 1973, p. 4). Also, “environments
are characterized by the people who occupy them” (Weinrach, 1984, pp. 63-64).
To distinguish “congruence” from Holland’s other constructs, students often find it


--- chapter2/32.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND AppiviING THEORIES OF Cazeer Deve.orment = 73

helpful to view the “u” and “e” in “congruence” as representing the fact that congru-
ence refers to the relationship between “you” and the “environment.”

Holland uses a hexagonal model to represent the relationships within and
between types (Figure 2.1). Concerning the latter, the highest level of congruence
exists when there is a direct correspondence between workers’ personality types
and their work environments (c.g., investigative personality types in investigative
work environments). The next highest level of congruence exists when individuals
are in work environments that are adjacent to their types on the hexagon (e.g., a
realistic personality type in an investigative work environment). The lowest level of
congruence exists when individuals are in work environments that are opposite to
their personality types on the hexagonal model (e.g., a social type in a realistic work
environment). The primary goal of career counseling is helping clients identify and
connect with congruent work environments.

Realistic Investigative

Conventional Artistic
Enterprising
Degree of Consistency Personality Patterns
remem Hi6)h RI, RC, IR, IA, Al, AS,
SA, SE, ES, EC, CE
Medium RA, RE, IS, IC, AR, AE,
SI, SC, EA, ER, CS, Ci
Low RS, IE, AC, SR, El, CA
Figure 2.1

The relationships among Holland types.
Source: Information from Holland’s Hexagon, ACT Research Report No. 29, by J. L. Holland, D. R.
Whitney, N. S. Cole, and J. M. Richards, Jr., 1969, Iowa City: The American College Testing Program.
Copyright © 1969 The American College Testing Program. Reprinted by permission.


--- chapter2/33.jpg ---

74

CHapter 2

Differentiation

To describe people and their work environments, Holland focuses on the three types
the person or environment most closely resembles. However, some people and en-
vironments are more clearly defined, or differentiated, than others. For example, a
person may more predominantly resemble one Holland type and have little resem-
blance to other types (a high level of differentiation), or a single type may dominate
an environment. Other persons or environments may resemble multiple types equally
and therefore be relatively undifferentiated or poorly defined. Holland referred to
the degree of distinctness among types representing a person’s personality profile as
“differentiation.” Because people who are undifferentiated can have difficulty mak-
ing career decisions, career interventions are often directed toward helping clients
achieve greater differentiation among Holland types.

Consistency

The degree of relatedness within types is referred to as consistency. The hexagonal
model is useful in illustrating the similarities across types. For example, types located
next to each other on the hexagon (e.g,, realistic and investigative) have more in com-
mon than types that are farther apart (e.g., realistic and social). Higher degrees of
