living. In fact, they note that “unplanned events are not only inevitable, they are de-
sirable” (p. 118) and refer to this phenomenon as “planned happenstance.” Planned
happenstance can be incorporated into career counseling by teaching clients “to


--- chapter2/45.jpg ---

86

Craprer 2

generate, recognize, and incorporate chance events into the process of their career
development” (Krumboltz & Henderson, 2002, p. 49). Specifically, career counsel-
ors can ask their clients questions such as: “How have unplanned events influenced
your career in the past? How did you enable each event to influence your career de-
velopment? How do you feet about encountering unplanned events in your future?”
(2002, p. 50). Counselor and client interactions that intentionally address the role
of chance in career development help to normalize such occurrences, help clients see
their thematic influence upon their career development, and help clients be increas-
ingly open to noticing and acting upon unplanned events in the future. In essence,
an internal locus of control and increased sense of personal self-efficacy are fostered.

Mitchell et al. (1999) focus on the skills clients need to develop to take advantage
of unplanned events in their career development. They note that developing a sense
of curiosity, being persistent, being flexible, maintaining a sense of optimism, and
being willing to take risks represent a set of skills that increase the individual’s ability
to take advantage of unplanned events.

Evaluating Career Development Interventions

Typically, counselors evaluate the success of career development interventions by
standards determining whether clients experience a reduction in career indecision.
Krumboltz recommends that career counselors consider revising these criteria. For
example, counselors using LTCC view indecision as a desirable quality for moti-
vating clients to engage in new learning activities. Hence, Krumboltz recommends
reframing “indecision” to “open-mindedness.”

Krumboltz also suggests that the goal of achieving congruence between indi-
viduals and their work environments is unnecessarily restricting because “birds of
a feather” do not always flock together (i.e., there is intra-occupational variability
among people). Two very different people can be successful in the same occupation.
Krumboltz (1996) also argues that the congruence criterion is less useful today be-
cause it is based on stagnant definitions of occupational environments, thereby over-
looking changes in work environments: “Heterogeneity, not homogeneity, within
occupations is now more highly valued” (p. 73).

In place of these two traditional outcome criteria, Krumboltz recommends
focusing on measuring changes in client characteristics such as skills, values, beliefs,
interests, and work habits. Counselors can ask themselves whether their career devel-
opment interventions have stimulated their clients to engage in new learning activi-
ties. Process measures can focus on assessing the degree to which clients have made
efforts to create more satisfying lives (e.g., Have they engaged in career exploratory
or information-seeking behaviors?).

Evaluating LTCC

LICC is new and relatively untested by research. There is, however, extensive re-
search supporting the general social learning theory (Hackett et al., 1991). Addition-
ally, Krumboltz (1996) cites several studies supporting SLTCDM hypotheses related
to the development of educational and occupational preferences, task-approach
skills, and action.


--- chapter2/46.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND AprlyinG THzoRIes OF Career Development 87

A strength of LTCC is that it addresses both environmental and intra-individual

variables affecting career development. As such, LTCC is very compatible with
Super’s Archway model of career development, with LTCC offering a bit more in

terms of specific ways in which environmental and personal variables influence ca-
reer decision making. LTCC also can be used as a framework for understanding the
development of interests leading to one’s personal modal orientation as described by
Holland’s theory, Finally, the development of the CBI, and subsequent application
of strategies such as cognitive restructuring and reframing, provide useful and impor-
tant applications of the theory to career development interventions.

MyCounselingLab

‘Goto Topic 4: The Development of Career Be-
= havior arid Choice in the MyCounselingLab™

site (www.MyCounselingLab.com) for Career

Development Interventions in thé 21st Century,
Fourth Edition, where you can:

© \ Find learning outcomes’ for The: Devel-
--Opment of Career Bebavior and. Choice

along with the national, standards: that
“"-gofinect to these outcomes.

. Conmpioie Assignments and Activities:

that can help you more’ deeply. under-
«. stand the chapter content.

*- Apply and practice. your understanding
of the core’skills identified in the chapter
-with the Building Counseling Skills unit.

¢ © Prepare yourself for professional certifica--,
tion with a Practice for Certification quiz.:

* Connect to videos through the Video and
Resource Library. ee Pee

Summary

The theories discussed in this chapter form the
foundation for how the leading theorists and
practitioners have conceptualized the career
development process for more than 50 years.
There are ways in which these theories converge,
but there are many ways in which they do not.
They each contribute important perspectives for
conceptualizing how careers develop and how
career choices are made, Thus there is no one
theory that sufficiently addresses all possible fac-
tors influencing career development and all cli-
ent career concerns. This is not surprising given
the highly complex nature of career develop-
ment. However, these theories do provide a solid
foundation upon which to expand our thinking

about the career development process and career
development interventions. Particular areas ripe
for expansion include describing how careers de-
velop for a wider range of people. Most of the
early theories of career development were based
on the career experience of White males and may
lack applicability to women and members of di-
verse racial, ethnic, socioeconomic, and religious
groups. Another area ripe for theory expansion
is the process and content of career counseling.
Most early theories of career development em-
phasize the career development process rather
than career development interventions. More
treatment-outcome studies directed toward de-
termining which interventions are appropriate


--- chapter2/47.jpg ---

88 Cuarrer 2

for which clients with what career concerns are
needed.

Nonetheless, the theories discussed in this
chapter provide an important stimulus in the
evolutionary process of theory development. As
these theories continue to evolve and as new
theories emerge, it is hoped that theorists will

continue the process of providing fuller, more
detailed, and more comprehensive descriptions,

of the career development process that can x )
used to provide effective career development
interventions to a wide range of people. The
emerging theories discussed in the next chapter
provide evidence of such progress,

Student Activities

1. Review the Holland types. Which types are
you most like? How do your activities re-
flect these types?

2. Review Super’s career development tasks.
Which tasks are you most concerned with
at this point in your life? What resources
and support would help you to cope effec-
tively with those tasks?

3. Review Gottfredson’s theory. In what ways
has sex-role stereotyping impacted on your
career?

4. Consider the life role of a worker. What have
you leamed about this life role from your

parents/guardians? What have you learned
about this life role from your relatives? In
what ways has culture influenced your un-
derstanding of the life role of a worker?

5. Review the theory of John Krumboltz. Iden-
tify two worldview generalizations that
you hold. Identify three self-observations
{you might begin this by stating, “I’m the
kind of person who... .” and “One thing I
value is...” and “I’m really good at...”),

6. Reflect upon your early life experiences and
consider how well Anne Roe’s theory de-
scribes your career choices.

References

Anderson, W. P., & Niles, S$. G. (1995), Career and
personal concerns expressed by career counseling
clients. The Career Development Quarterly, 43,
240-245,

Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought
and action: A social-cognitive theory. Upper Sad-
dle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Betz, N. E., & Corning, A. F. (1993}. The insepara-
bility of “career” and “personal” counseling. The
Career Development Quarterly, 42, 137-148.

Blanchard, C. A., & Lichtenberg, J. W. (2003).
Compromise in career decision making: A test
of Gottfredson’s theory. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 62, 250-271.

Blustein, D. L. (1994). “Who am 1?” The question
of self and identity in career development. In
M. L. Savickas & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Convergence

in career development theories: Implications for
science and practice (pp. 139-154). Palo Alto,
CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

Blustein, D.L., Gill, N.J.K., Kenna, A. C., & Murphy,
K. A. (2006). The psychology of working. Career
Planning and Adult Development Journal, 21,
10-21,

Borgen, F. H, (1991), Megatrends and milestones in
vocational behavior: A 20-year counseling psy-
chology perspective. Journal of Vocational Behav-
ior, 39, 263-290.

Borodovsky, L., 8 Ponterotto, J. (1994). A family-
based approach to multicultural career de-
velopment. In P. Pedersen & J. Carey (Eds.),
Multicultural counseling in schools (pp. 195-206).
Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

Brown, D. (1996). Brown’s values-based, holistic
model of career and life-role choices and satis-
faction. In D. Brown, L. Brooks, & Associates


--- chapter2/48.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND APPLYING THEORIES OF Career Develorment 89

(Eds.}, Career choice and development (3rd ed.,
pp. 337-372}. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Brown, M. T., Lum, J. L., & Voyle, K. (1997). Roe
revisited: A call for the reappraisal of the theory
of personality development and career choice.
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 51, 283-294.

Buehler, C. (1933). Der menschliche lebenslauf als
psychologisches problem. Leipzig: Hirzel.

Cairo, P. C., Kritis, K. J., & Myers, R. M. (1996).
Career assessment and the Adult Career Con-
cerns Inventory, Journal of Career Assessment, 4,
189-204.

Cochran, D. B, Wang, E. W., Stevenson, S. J.,
Johnson, L. E., & Crews, C. (in press). Adolescent
occupational aspirations: Test of Gottfredson’s
Theory of Circumscription and Compromise. The
Career Development Quarterly.

Coltrane, $., & Adams, M. (1997). Work-family im-
agery and gender stereotypes: Television and the
reproduction of difference. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, $0, 323-347.

Donahue, R. (2006). Person-environment congruence
in relation to career change and career persistence.
journal of Vocational Behavior, 68, 304-515.

Downes, M., & Kroeck, K. G. (1996). Discrepancies
between existing jobs and individual interests: An
empirical investigation of Holland's model. Jour
nal of Vocational Bebavior, 48, 107-117.

Eagle, B. W., Miles; E. W., & Icenogle, M. L.
(1997), Interrole conflicts and the permeability
of work and family domains: Are there gender
differences? Journal of Vocational Behavior, 50,
168-184,

Ginzberg, E., Ginsburg, $. W., Axelrad, S., & Herma,
J. (1951). Occupational choice: An approach to a
general theory. New York: Columbia University
Press.

Gottfredson, L. S. (1981), Cireumscription and com-
promise: A developmental theory of occupational
aspirations. Journal of Counseling Psychology,
28, 545-379,

Gottfredson, L. S. (1996). A theory of circumscrip-
tion and compromise. In D. Brown, L. Brooks, &
Associates (Eds.), Career choice and development
(3rd ed., pp. 179-281). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Gottfredson, L. S$. (2002). Gottfredson’s theory of
circumscription, compromise, and self-creation.
In D. Brown & Associates (Eds.), Career choice
and development (4th ed., pp. 85-148). San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Gorttfredson, L. S. (2003). The challenge and promise
of cognitive career assessment. Journal of Career
Assessment, 11, 115-135,

Gottfredson, L. S. (2005). Applying Gottfredson’s
theory of circumscription and compromise in ca-
