UNDERSTANDING AND ApplvING THEORIES OF Career Development 517

and capacity. They progress through these substages by using their innate sense of
curiosity, first to engage in occupational fantasies, and then, through exploring their
environment (e.g., home, school, parental, and peer relationships). Their curiosity
leads them to acquire information about work and about their own interests and ca-
pacities. When things go well, children begin to develop a sense of mastery and con-
trol over their environment and in their ability to make decisions. Moving through
the growth stage, children begin to realize the importance of planning for the future
and that their behavior in the present influences their future lives, Moreover, they
are increasingly able to use what they have learned about themselves and work to
explore the viability of various educational and occupational opportunities.

EXPLORATION. Using self and occupational information, and their heightened
sense of awareness that the present influences the future, adolescents ages 14 to 24
turn to planning for the future. Within the career development domain, future plan-
ning involves addressing the tasks of crystallizing and specifying occupational prefer-
ences. Once a preference is specified, people tuen to implementing an occupational
choice. These tasks occur within the substages of tentative, transition, and trial (with
litle commitment), respectively.

Crystallizing an occupational preference requires people to clarify the type of
work they would enjoy. The process of crystallization builds upon the occupational
and self-information acquired during the growth stage. Using this information,
people focus on acquiring more in-depth occupational information to explore the
degree to which specific occupations may allow for self-concept implementation.
Thus, accurate self-understanding is essential for identifying appropriate occupa-
tional preferences.

The process of specifying occupational preferences requires the ability to make
decisions by choosing from among the occupations being considered. The process
of implementing varies, depending on what choice has been specified. Some choices
require further training and education in order to gain entry into an occupation.
Other choices provide the opportunity for direct entry into an occupation. Regard-
less of the choice, implementing requires taking action toward getting started in one’s
chosen occupational field.

ESTABLISHMENT. Getting established in a career generally occurs from about
age 25 to age 45. The career development tasks associated with this stage are sta-
bilizing, consolidating, and advancing. Stabilizing begins immediately after entering
an occupation as one evaluates whether the occupational preference one has imple-
mented provides adequate opportunity for self-concept expression. Specifically, one
must assess the organizational culture and determine whether he or she possesses
the skills and interests necessary to succeed in the occupation he or she has entered.
As one becomes more stabilized in an occupation, he or she turns attention away
from questioning whether the choice was a good one and begins to focus on becom-
ing a dependable producer and developing a positive reputation in the occupation
{i.e., consolidating). Focusing on becoming a dependable producer often leads to the
opportunity to move into a position of higher pay and responsibility (i.e., advancing).
The reputation for successful performance one sought to develop is now achieved.


--- chapter2/11.jpg ---

52. Cuarter 2

It is important to note, however, that at any time in this process a person may
decide that the occupational choice he or she made is no longer a good one. If this oc-
curs, recycling to exploration occurs so that a more appropriate occupational choc
can be crystallized, specified, and implemented.

MAINTENANCE, During maintenance (approximately ages 45 to 65), workers en-
counter the career development tasks of holding, updating, and innovating. Many
people are confronted with the choice of either keeping up with the advancements in
their field to maintain or improve their level of performance or opting for a change
in occupational fields. In the latter instance, workers must recycle through exploration-
and establishment-stage tasks. In the former (i.e., holding), workers turn their atten-
tion to updating their skills and applying new skills in innovative ways within their
current occupations. Those who decide to stay in their current occupations but not
to update their skills often become poor performers and stagnate in their work (i.e.,
they become “stuck” at the holding task). In these instances, career interventions ad-
dressing career renewal are required. Those who update and innovate often become
excellent mentors to less experienced workers.

DISENGAGEMENT. At some point toward the end of the maintenance stage, often
as physical capacities begin to decline, interest in work activities begins to wane.
Workers become more concerned with planning for retirement living. Thus, the
disengagement stage involves the career development tasks of deceleration, retire-
ment planning, and retirement living. As workers begin decelerating from their work
activities (currently at about age 65), they tend to become concerned about their life-
styles and activities in retirement. Often, these concerns contain physical, spiritual,
and financial considerations.

Although career development stage theory originally represented a more linear
version of career development, Super readily acknowledged that recycling through,
career stages and tasks occurs with frequency throughout one’s life, thereby sug-
gesting a process that could be linear in nature, but in all likelihood will not be for
most people. We suggest a further cefining of stage theory. Specifically, we make two
recommendations regarding using Super’s stage theory in career counseling. First,
we suggest that career practitioners understand that people can be concerned with
multiple career development tasks and multiple stages simultaneously. Second, we
recommend that career practitioners conceptualize stages in a fashion that is similar
to the notion of “status.” Regarding the former, it is not hard to imagine, for ex-
ample, that people can be concerned about deciding what they will do next in their
careers (i.e., exploration) while also being concerned about whether they will have
the resources to survive financially in retirement (i.e., disengagement). Such a person
is likely to explore more narrowly than another person who may only be concerned
with exploration stage tasks, We think that understanding the constellation of ca-
reer concerns a client or student experiences at any point in time provides important
information regarding the sort of support and resources the client will find useful.
Viewing the client’s constellation of career concerns from the perspective of status
moves away from linear notions of career stage theory and helps reinforce the point
that career tasks present themselves to persons in ways that are not always restricted



--- chapter2/12.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING ANO ApptvING THEORIES OF Carcer Develorment — 53

by chronological age. Thus, Super’s stages and tasks provide important information
regarding the potential array of career concerns, or societal expectations, that a per-
son may be attempting to cope with at any point in his or her life. Understanding the
life span segment of Supet’s theory in this way will foster a greater understanding of
a person’s career development experience.

Life Space

While workers are busy earning a living, they are also busy living a life (Super et al.,
1996). The “simultaneous combination of life roles we play constitutes the lifestyle;
their sequential combination structures the life space and constitutes the life cycle.
The total structure is the career pattern” (Super, 1980, p. 288). Life roles interact
so that the same job holds different meanings for two individuals who live in differ-
ent situations, For example, the meaning and purpose your professor finds in his or
her job is influenced by previous roles your professor has played in life (e.g., child,
student, worker in previous occupations) as well as the current roles your professor
is playing (e.g., partner, parent, child, homemaker, sibling, friend). Because of the
life roles each professor plays, your professor’s dedication to work, and the way in
which he or she defines the work role, may differ from someone else’s who is also a
professor.

The salience people attach to the constellation of life roles they play defines what
Super referred to as the “life structure.” The life-space segment of Super’s theory
acknowledges that people differ in the degree of importance they attach to work. Un-
fortunately, as we mentioned in Chapter 1, many people link work with self-worth
in such a way that devalues the various life roles that have so much to contribute to
one’s sense of self-esteem and self-efficacy (not to mention to society). Many models
of career counseling have disregarded the effects of life-role interactions and the fact
that effective participation in multiple life roles allows for maximal! opportunities
for values expression.

Super noted that people tend to play nine major roles throughout their lives, In
approximate chronological order these roles are: (1) son or daughter, (2) student,
(3) leisurite, (4) citizen, (5) worker, (6) spouse (or partner), (7) homemaker, (8) par-
ent, and (9} pensioner. The individual’s career comprises the total constellation of
life roles engaged in over the course of a lifetime (Super, 1980, p. 284). Life roles
are generally played out in specific theaters. These theaters are: (1) the home, (2) the
school, (3) the workplace, and (4) the community.

Effective life-role participation is very difficult to achieve. Conflicting life-role
demands make effective life-role participation feel like a “moving target.” At vari-
ous times, priority must be given to specific life roles. Sometimes deciding which role
takes priority is relatively easy (e.g., giving priority to one’s job when there are low
demands from one's children) and sometimes not (e.g., when the demands from job
and family are concurrently high). At times, life roles typically played in one theater
spill over into another theater and create conflict (Eagle, Miles, & Icenogle, 1997;
Loscocco, 1997; Perrone, 2005). For example, when work spills over from the work-
place to the home, the roles of worker, partner, and parent become enmeshed and
insufficient attention is paid to each role. Thus, life roles interact in ways that can be


--- chapter2/13.jpg ---

54

Crapter 2

extensive or minimal: supportive, supplementary, compensatory, or neutral. Life is
best when the life roles we play nurture each other and offer opportunities for us to
express our values. Life is stressful when the life roles we play are at odds with each
other and provide little opportunity for us to express what we value.

Thus, it is not surprising that many career counseling clients present with con-
cerns related to life-structure issues. That is, many of them are seeking assistance
in coping more effectively with changing life-role demands. For such clients, career
interventions that address only one life role—work—are inadequate. Super’s theory
embraces this fact by focusing on how clients structure the basic roles of work, play,
friendship, and family into a life that is satisfying (Super et al., 1996).

Self-Concepts

Super defined self-concept as a “picture of the self in some role, situation, or position,
performing some set of functions, or in some web of relationships” (1963, p. 18).
Super (1980) uses the Archway Model and the Life-Career Rainbow to depict the
various personal (e.g., aptitudes, values, needs) and situational (e.g, the family, the
community, the economy, society) determinants that shape the constellation of life
roles that individuals play over the course of a life span and that interact to influence
the development of the person’s self-concepts. In these models, Super delineates both
the longitudinal processes of career development as well as the more situation-specific
content of career decision making. Career decisions reflect our attempts at translating
our self-understanding {i.e., our self-concepts) into career terms (Super, 1984).

Self-concepts contain both objective and subjective elements. Objectively, we
develop self-understanding by comparing ourselves with others (e.g., “I am like
accountants in that | am good with numbers” or “I am in the 95th percentile on
mechanical ability”). Subjectively, we develop understanding through focusing on
our uniqueness emerging out of the life stories we construct. Our life stories repre-
sent our efforts at constructing meaning from our life experiences. There is relative
homogeneity in our objective career experience (e.g., almost everyone reading this
book is focused on acquiring the occupational title of counselor or counseling psy-
chologist). There is tremendous heterogeneity in our subjective career experience
(e.g., everyone reading this book has a unique history of personal experience that has
led him or her to the place of wanting to work within the helping professions). We
use our objective and subjective understanding to identify appropriate career goals.
Such understanding guides us as we make choices about the degree and the nature
of our life-role participation. Because self-concepts continue to develop over time,
the need to make choices and the process of adjusting to the choices implemented
represent lifelong tasks.

Applying Super’s Theory

Toward the end of his career, Super increasingly focused on translating his theory
into practice (Super et al., 1992). As noted, Super labeled his approach the Career
Development Assessment and Counseling (C-DAC) model. Like other theorists (e.g.,
Holland, Krumboltz), Super translated his theory into practice, in part, through the
systematic application of career assessment instruments emanating from each of his


--- chapter2/14.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND AppwvinG THEORES CF Career Development = 55

theory segments. Although these assessment instruments are key elements in the
C-DAC model, they are not required for addressing Super’s theory segments in career
counseling. (It is important to note that many of the C-DAC assessment instruments
are available for no cost at vocopher.com.)

The primary emphasis of the C-DAC model (and the traditional focus of career
counseling) is on helping clients cope with concerns arising within the exploration
stage of the life-span theory segment (Super, 1957; Super et al., 1996). Many people
associate exploration only with adolescents who are at the preimplementation stage
of career development; however, exploration continues throughout life: “Explora-
tion has come to be expected not only in adults who are changing career direction,
but also in adults who are responding to the demands of progressing in the career
they have chosen and in which they wish to remain” (Phillips, 1982, p. 130).

Persons encountering the exploration stage for the first time focus on clarifying
their values, skills, and interests, and connecting these attributes to initial occupa-
tional options. Formal standardized assessments can be very useful in providing
initial career explorers with foundational self-information required for coping
effectively with exploration stage tasks. However, persons recycling through the
exploration stage use exploratory behavior to resolve a wide variety of career
issues (Niles et al., 1998). For example, some people use exploratory behavior to
maintain their current positions while they focus on retirement living. Others use
exploration to start over in new occupations, whereas still others use exploratory
behavior to become more innovative in their current positions. As we noted earlier,
it is not uncommon for people to experience career concerns across multiple career
stages concurrently. It is important to note, therefore, that understanding the full
range of a client’s career concerns provides important information regarding the
career tasks with which the client is attempting to cope. Although exploration
always involves learning more about our situation, or ourselves, what needs to be
learned depends on our developmental status and salient life roles (Super, 1983).
Career development rarely occurs ina linear fashion. Thus, identifying each client's
constellation of developmental task concerns is an important first step in construct-
ing appropriate career interventions,

For example, Juanita (presented at the beginning of the chapter) is confronting
the career development tasks of crystallizing and specifying occupational preferences
for the first time (i.e., she is an “initial career explorer”). To cope effectively with
the exploration-stage tasks, Juanita will need to acquire much more self-information
(e.g., values, interests, and abilities) and information about the world-of-work. She
may also need to learn about the career decision-making process (i.e., how good
career decisions are made). Then she will need assistance in translating the infor-
mation she acquires into a career plan. That is, she must be able to make concrete
connections between this information and her future career, It is hoped that in the
process of developing a career plan, Juanita will also be able to make connections
between her school activities and her future, thereby becoming more motivated at
school. As Juanita crystallizes her occupational self-concept, she will need to reality-
test her tentative choices. Activities such as role playing, participating in schoot
clubs, job shadowing, volunteering, and part-time employment will be useful to her
in increasing her self-knowledge and occupational information.


--- chapter2/15.jpg ---

56

Carrer 2

To measure concern with life-span career development stages and tasks with
adult clients, Super and his colleagues developed the Adult Career Concerns Inven-
tory (ACCT) (Super, Thompson, & Lindeman, 1988). The ACCI measures planful-
ness or concern for the developmental tasks of the four career stages of exploration,
establishment, maintenance, and disengagement posited in life-span, life-space the-
ory (Super et al., 1988). Each career stage includes three tasks, which respondents
rate in terms of level of concern using a 5-point Likert-type scale ranging from 1 (no
concern) to 5 (great concern) with the associated task. For example, the exploration
stage consists of the tasks of crystallization, specification, and implementation. The
tasks for each of the stages are arranged in 5-item substages, resulting in a total of
60 items. Summing each set of three-task substage scores yields a total score for the
corresponding career stage.

The ACCT is useful at the onset of career counseling to identify clients’ develop-
mental task concerns and for identifying the exploratory resources that may be of
most use in helping clients cope effectively with their career concerns. For example,
clients concerned with the task of updating can be encouraged to attend meetings
and seminars on new methods in their fields, to visit places where they can see new
developments in their fields, to conduct information interviews with knowledgeable
people, and to take refresher training (items 36 to 40, respectively, on the Updating
Scale of the ACCI). Counselors can use ACCI scores to identify the client’s career
development status regarding the constellation of career concerns with which the
client is attempting to cope.

Some clients, however, may be unable to make career choices due to the fact
that they lack the resources necessary for choosing (e.g., adolescents may be lacking
career maturity and adults may be lacking career adaptability). Individuals who are
not ready to make good career choices need to (a) develop positive attitudes toward
career exploration and planning, (b) learn how to gather information about them-
selves and occupational options, and (c) learn how to make career decisions.

The Career Development Inventory (CDI) (Thompson, Lindeman, Super,
Jordaan, & Myers, 1984) assesses whether high school and college students are
ready to make career decisions, Specifically, the CDI assesses career planning, career
exploration, world-of-work information, and knowledge of career decision-making
principles. Scores indicate the client’s degree of readiness for career decision making.
CDI scores can be used to answer questions such as: Does the respondent know how
to make career decisions? Is the respondent aware of the need to make career plans?
Does the respondent possess both general information about the world-of-work and
specific information about the preferred occupation? Does the respondent know how
to make use of exploratory resources for gathering information relevant to the career
decision-making process?

High scores on the CDI scales indicate affirmative answers to these questions (i.e,
that the client has been involved in making career plans, possesses occupational infor-
mation, has used exploratory resources effectively, and knows how to make decisions).
In such instances, clients are often able to proceed with career decision making,

