--- chapter2/1.jpg ---

chapter

42

oSoreeats

aires

Understanding and Applying
Theories of Career Development

Don’t Let Theories Boggle Your Mind.

It is easy to be intimated by the word, theory’ The real world is an ex-

tremely complicated place. Human beings and their bebavior are so complex
that no one understands completely why people think, feel, and act as they
do. A theory is just an explanation—an oversimplified explanation of what
is going on.

A theory is like a road map. Suppose you have a road map of California

and you want to drive from San Francisco to Los Angeles. You see a red
line marked “101” stretching between the two cities on the map. Aha, you
think, Pll drive down that red highway 101. But when you get to the bigh-
way, you see it is black asphalt. Why does the map show it to be red? The
map lies! Why does the map lie? Because the map-maker wants to make it
easier for you to see the path. You drive down the highway and see office
buildings, gardens, and swimming pools, but none of them are indicated
on the map. The map not only distorts reality—it omits zillions of details.
Why? Because all those details would make it too complicated to find the
best route between two cities.

In the same way, a theory attempts to explain a complex situation by

overemphasizing and distorting the importance of certain variables while
ignoring completely other variables that the theory-maker considers irrel-
evant. Theories are oversimplifications just as road maps are oversimplifica-
tions. Yet road maps are very useful for certain purposes—even with all of
their faults. Similarly, theories can be useful—even with their faults.

A theory is just one way of oversimplifying a complex situation so that it

is easier for you to see the big picture. That picture is not reality itself—just
one theory-maker’s version of it.

John D. Krumboltz
Stanford University



--- chapter2/2.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND ApptvinnG THEORIES OF Career Deveroement = 43

@ MyCounselingLab
Visit the MyCounselingLab” site for Career Development Interventions. in.
the 21st Century, Fourth Edition.to enhance’ your understanding of chapter.
‘concepts. You'll have the opportunity to practice yaur skills through video- and
case-based Assignments and Activities aswell as. Building Counseling Skills.
“units, and té prepare for your certification exam with Practice for Certification
quizzes. 5

Jen isa 17yearold Latina student in the eighth grade in a predominantly White,
middle-class neighborhood. She is “normal” in intelligence but reports that she dislikes
school. She associates with a group of girls who are often in trouble with the police. !t
is your impression, however, that these friendships are superficial. Recently, some of the
girls in her circle of friends were arrested for drug possession (marijuenc). Juanita is not
hostile or disrespectful. However, she routinely hands schoolwork in late, if at all. Her
parents have asked you to help her “make a good career choice.”

In most classes, Juanita is apathetic, but she enjoys art class (especially painting} and
being in the school band (she plays the flute). She dislikes math classes. Juanita has wo
younger sisters, ages 12 and 14, Her mother is employed as a teacher's aide ina local
elementary school and her father is employed as a car salesperson in a local dealership.
Juanita’s current plans are to finish high school but she has not made plans for what she
will do beyond that point, She stated thot she “might like to be in a rock band.” She
agrees to meet with you to discuss her career plans

@ CAREER DEVELOPMENT THEORIES

As you read about career development theories, we encourage you to keep John
Krumboltz’s comments in mind and to reflect upon how effectively each of the theories
addresses Juanita’s career concerns. You will notice that career development theories
differ in their coverage of the career development process versus career decision-making
content. Savickas (2002) notes that theories emphasize either “individual differences”
related to occupations {viewed as describing how people can find their fit within the
occupational structure) or “individual development” related to careers (viewed as how
people express career behavior across time). For example, developmental theories (e.g.,
Super, Gottfredson) highlight the expression of career behavior over time. Person-
environment theories (e.g., Work Adjustment Theory, Holland) address the essential
ingredients (i.e., occupational and self-information) for choosing an occupation. One
of the major reasons for studying the various approaches to career theory rather than
concentrating on only one emphasis, whatever that emphasis may be, is the fact that no
one theory is sufficient to explain the totality of individual or group career behavior. As
Super (1992) observed, the question of “which theory is better” is specious because the
theories complement each other in addressing various facets of the complexity of career
behavior. In this sense, each theory adds to the comprehensiveness of insight about


--- chapter2/3.jpg ---

44

Cuarter 2

career behavior that now exists. As John Krumboltz notes above, theories are useful,
even with their limitations. We encourage you to become familiar with the extensive
research literature regarding career theories and to use that information plus your own
experience to determine ways in which career development theories help you in your
work with your students or clients.

In reflecting upon career development theories, Richardson (1993) states that “the
theoretical and research literature in vocational psychology career development is notably
oriented toward the White middle class. Moreover, there is almost no acknowledgement
that poor and lower class populations, regardless of race or ethnicity, are almost totally
absent from the literature” {p. 426). Tinsley (1994) counters that a substantial body of
research over the years has not provided support for sex or economic-level differences.
Tinsley expresses concern that “there is a tendency to dismiss general models that have
applicability to both sexes and all economic class levels as limited in applicability only to
White, middle-class men” (p. 109), These varying views, offered by leading scholars in the
field, require serious consideration and thoughtful reflection. Most would agree, however,
that the need for expanding our understanding of the career development experiences of
persons of color, women, sexual minorities, persons with disabilities, and the less affluent
members of our society remains an important task for the field. Thus, we encourage you
to consider the following questions as you read the theories presented in Chapters 2 and 3:

1. How well do the theories describe the career development process for members
of diverse groups?

2. How well do the theories describe the career development process in general?

3. How well do the theories describe the factors involved in making a career
choice?

. How well do the theories inform the practice of career counseling?

. To what degree is there empirical support for the theories?

. What gaps can you identify within the theories presented?

Dns

Because no one theory is likely to “do it all,” we think it is important to identify the
strengths and limitations of each theory. Doing so will allow you to draw upon the best
the field has to offer. For those interested in career development research, identifying
the gaps will also provide useful information for potentially fruitful research pursuits.

There are many ways to present career theories, Often, theories are presented in
chronological order, beginning with the work of Frank Parsons and proceeding to the
most recent theories. Other times they are grouped by categories (e.g, psychological,
developmental, trait-factor; objective vs. subjective). In determining how to organize
the career theories, we attempted to present them in a fashion that we thought made
sense as practitioners,



--- chapter2/4.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND ApptvIG THEORIES OF Careee Development = 45

The work of Parsons and later trait-factor theorists was discussed in the previous
chapter, largely because these models are intimately intertwined with the historical
roots of career development interventions. The work of contributors such as Parsons,
Williamson, and Dawis and Lofquist highlights the importance of considering the in-
teractions between the person’s traits and factors in the work environment in career
decision making. Building upon our discussion of Parsons’ model and trait-factor
approaches (e.g., TWA) presented in Chapter 1, we begin the current chapter with
Donald Super’s theory for several reasons. First, Super’s theory provides a useful
framework for conceptualizing career development over the life span. His theory also
acknowledges the various personal (e.g., needs, values, abilities) and situational (e.g.,
peer groups, family, labor market) determinants that influence career development.
Super’s theory places work within the context of multiple roles played in life. Finally,
his theory addresses helping people to clarify, articulate, and implement their life-
role self-concepts. Thus, Super’s theory provides a useful, overarching framework for
viewing career development processes.

To expand on the influence of personal and situational influences on career
development, we briefly discuss Anne Roe’s career theory and then describe Linda
Gottfredson’s theory. Roe’s theory points to the importance of early life experiences
in career development. Gottfredson’s theory addresses the fact that sex-role stereo-
typing influences the career aspirations of men and women (Gottfredson, 1996,
2002). Her theory offers a developmental and sociological perspective of career
development. The theory is focused primarily on the career development process as
it relates to the types of compromises people make in formulating their occupational
aspirations.

We then discuss Holland’s theory, which has generated more research than any
other career theory. Arguably, Holland's typology provides the most useful frame-
work for understanding and predicting individual behavior (i.e., job satisfaction, job
performance, and occupational stability) within work environments. Through the use
of assessment instruments, Holland applies his typology to help individuals clarify and
implement their vocational identities (Spokane, Luchetta, & Richwine, 2002).

There are times, however, when “faulty” or irrational thinking impedes individu-
als in their career development, The cumulative effect of a variety of learning experi-
ences can result in varying degrees of functionality among individuals with regard to
their ability to make effective career decisions, For example, when individuals receive
adequate support and are exposed to effective role models, they often develop inter-
ests and skills leading to satisfying career options. Conversely, when such support is
lacking or individuals are misinformed, they often disregard appropriate options be-
cause they lack confidence or they adhere to beliefs (e.g., “I must decide now what I
will do for the rest of my life”) that keep them “stuck” in their career development. In
the latter cases, individuals need assistance in developing beliefs that are more useful
in making effective career decisions. In these instances, the work of John Krumboltz
provides a useful framework for helping practitioners to foster career development
in their clients. We discuss this theory in the final section of this chapter. In Chapter 3,
we focus attention on emerging theories of career development that hold promise
for providing effective descriptions of career development processes and practices.
Table 2.1 summarizes the theories discussed in Chapters 2 and 3.



--- chapter2/5.jpg ---

4B

y8iy

MO]

4B

MO}

ayorepoyy

MO}

sysoydwiy joanynoyjnyy

alolapoy

ayOu0poyy

41H

MO}

Moy

yy

aypispoyy
Hoddng yainesay

jopow orcs
s}008 Jouosiag
sucHDpadKa SUIOOINC,
ADDO YOYES

aoupjsuaddoy pauuniy
SuO}HID ‘syNys YooOddo yso]

pee
soustedxe Bujus0s]

Auap! jouoypo0,,

uouduosuinouTy

PAST/PIPL

S@IYDIDIOIY SPaoRy
sesuayadxe pooupyy AyD]
Ayygeidopo sec10>)
Aunious 309407)

sdeouos jeg

aonds of]

S480} juauojeAap 188107)
se8p)s 186107)

upds 847),

aouepuodsei07)
JUSUUOSAUa UD-ULUOSIOg
SSOUBOPOYSHOS

juaudojeasp
8310y> 188109
anyuBoo [oI00g

Juaudojeaap
@010yp J281DD,
Bulusoa] jorsog

BDOYD 188207)
JOP} IOI]
juaudojanep
[2210U9 188509)
jpoiBojo~nes
/|lusucdojanag

2ywioukpoyaksy
/Roeu] Aljpuosiag

jeuouidojanag

uouljsnipo /aa10y9
J90107)
JO|OO} ION,

wOUDIUSHE

HEYPOH |!)
UMOIG UBARIS
“quay Weqoy

zyoquagy uyof

Pun|oH uyof

uospaypocy
Dpun

aoy auuy

4edng pjouog

inbjoy py]

swmoq suey

sysuooyy

Avoauy 188103
SAK8UBOD |DID0g

Buyesunoz
J98i0Q JO
Aoays Buywoe]

S]ueWUOSAUA
SHO\A Pud
SOyYOUOSIEg
JOUoHDDOA,

uoyDaI yes
pud ‘asiwosdwiory

‘youd yoswun24>,
BD}0Y) 880)
ye Aicayy
Aujouosieg

snods i)
‘PeSeHT

JUsUySNIPY YOM

sausoag] 49aLn fo morning Jog

rzaqa Y



--- chapter2/6.jpg ---

Yb

Bi

4H

ayQepoyy

Si ARR EROS SE SE

aynuapoyy

MO]

MO}

MO}

MO}

aIDIepow

ajpiepow,

s]p}I01] Pud sWaYDg
SUIEHOg
suOpOUNY

SAyoUU eining

aed
wajqoud see107

Bunjow-Bujuooy)

sdajs youoyouny
uoyorardioyy}
poloud 188307)
uoK0 JuIof
peaquory

Aojuenul
Buuuoyd ayy aayosBoquy

‘Ausi@niq]
SSOUP2IDBULOD
aBunyp jorseg

saysn} JOOS

malneiuy a|Aig J8eu05)
Aygoidopy 18105
seweyl aif]
Ayjouosied jouoyooo,,

Alojusauy siyBnouy 10305)
wjowop Burssoooid oayndexy
aio apg Gulsse2cud
UODUNO UE 10 prUDIAY

isypuauiouayd
‘eBupyp pun
uoypziuDGiojjes

SAIDIORY

ISIAHONYSUOD

Aoaypuoloy

{uou|snlpe /ao}oyo
380109 |DNKEIUOD
8180100 Jo
anyzedsiad Q1wou:
puo ‘jouawdo
JOASP "JoUUDaYiG

201049
49a:09 enyuB07)

wySug wif
puo 10Aig uaqoy

uDIYSO7 AUD]

kenoeg BUD,

ulyjo>) Aoupny
“YODA ADIs|PO]
"Bun, pioyaiy

uesuby
Auung °}

SOIDIADS POY
zjU9} jeuDf
‘uOpsDay LEqoy
ifuosdwing sawof
‘uosieiag Aine)

si9alo5
jo Aoay] sopy>

WapoUl|sog

Buiwunjd
ayn enoi69iuy

Aoays
woydny|sSuoT)
Jaan)

yopoiddy
Bulssanoig
woyDUIO}U
aiqyuiBory

47



--- chapter2/7.jpg ---

48

Cuaeter 2

SUPER’S LIFE-SPAN, LIFE-SPACE THEORY
The leading developmental approach is Donald Super’s “life-span, life-space” theory r

(Super, 1990; Super, Savickas, & Super, 1996). The life-span, life-space theory
evolved over a 40-year time period, as Super and his colleagues worked to elabo-
rate and refine the various aspects of the theory (Super et al., 1996), Although
Super’s theory is primarily developmental in nature, he labeled it as a “differential-
developmental-social-phenomenological career theory” (Super, 1969). This label
communicates Super’s efforts at synthesizing and extending extant developmental
and career theories. Super understood that describing a process as complex as careet
development requires synthesizing the work of scholars from various disciplines
(e.g., psychology and sociology). For example, Super synthesized work by Buehler
(1933), Havighurst (1951), Kelly (1955), Miller & Form (1951), and Rogers (1951)
in conceptualizing various aspects of his theory of career development.

Super extended career theories by addressing shortcomings he perceived in the
theories proposed by his predecessors and his contemporaries. For example, Super’s
contemporaries, Ginzberg, Ginsburg, Axelrad, and Herma (1951), proposed a ca-
reer theory asserting that career choice is a developmental process (rather than a
single decision) in which compromises are made between the individual’s wishes and
occupational possibilities. They viewed the developmental process as spanning three
stages: (a) fantasy (birth to age 11), {b) tentative (age 11 to 17), and (c) realistic (age 17
to early twenties). They theorized that four factors (individual values, emotional
factors, the amount and kind of education, and the effect of reality through environ-
mental pressures) converged to shape the individual’s career decisions.

Super argued that the theory proposed by Ginzberg and his associates was defi-
cient in that it (a) did not take into account research related to the role of interests
in career decision making, {b} failed to operationally describe “choice,” (c) made a
sharp distinction between choice and adjustment, and (d) lacked a clear articulation of
the process of compromise as it relates to career choice. Responding to conditions such
as these, Super developed his “differential-developmental-social-phenomenological
career theory.”

Rather than developing a unified theory, however, Super developed his theory
segmentally. In fact, Super noted that in one sense “there is no ‘Super’s theory’; there
is just the assemblage of theories that I have sought to synthesize. In another sense,
the synthesis is a theory” (1990, p. 199). The result is really a “segmental theory”
describing three key aspects of career development: (a) life span, (b) life space, and
(c) self-concept. The theory culminates in an intervention model labeled as the Career
Development Assessment and Counseling (C-DAC) model (Super, Osborne, Walsh,
Brown, & Niles, 1992). We provide an updated version of the C-DAC model in this
chapter. The C-DAC model translates the three theory segments into career practice
to help people articulate their career concerns, examine their life-role salience, and
clarify their self-concepts.

Life-span, life-space theory builds upon key assumptions proposed by Super
(1953, 1933, 1990; Super & Bachrach, 1957}. These assumptions contend that
people differ in their important self-characteristics and self-concepts; that their
respective self-characteristics make them eligible for a number of occupations; that


--- chapter2/8.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND APplYING THEORIES OF Career Devetopment 49

each occupation requires specific worker traits but that these requirements are flex-
ible enough to allow for a variety of persons within specific occupations; and that
self-concepts evolve over time, making choice and adjustment continuous processes
for everyone. Further assumptions are that the change process for each person can
be described by specific life stages (growth, exploration, establishment, maintenance,
and decline or disengagement); that a person’s occupational level and career pattern
are influenced by contextual (e.g., family, socioeconomic status, educational oppor-
tunities, community) and personal (e.g., skills, personality, needs, values, interests)
factors; and that people’s readiness to cope with the career development tasks (career
maturity) they encounter is influenced by the their degree of success in coping with
previous tasks encountered in earlier stages of career development.

The life-span, life-space theory also builds on other factors, such as the notion
that a person’s career development can be facilitated by providing developmentally
appropriate career interventions across the life span; career choice involves develop-
ing and implementing one’s self-concepts and reflects a synthesizing and compromis-
ing process as the person develops and interacts with, as well as learns from, his or
her environment; that life satisfaction is dependent upon finding life-role opportuni-
ties that are consistent with a person’s important self-characteristics; and that it is
important for each person to structure life-role involvements that reflect his or her
preferences, values, and life-role self-concepts.

The propositions incorporate statements from diverse theoretical perspectives
(e.g., trait-and-factor, developmental, social learning, and psychodynamic), thus
supporting Super’s contention that his theory is more than a developmental one.
Super’s propositions also introduce some relatively novel concepts into the career
development literature. Specifically, Super expanded career development concepts
by encouraging the field to consider the notion that there is intraoccupational vari-
ability among workers, that multiple life-role development is important to consider
in career development, and that self-concepts evolve over time, making choice and
adjustment a continuous process. Thus, when Super’s propositions are placed in his-
torical context, they provide the impetus for shifting the paradigm within the field
from one that focuses on “vocation” to one that focuses on “career”; from one that
focuses exclusively on the content of career choice to one that highlights the process
of career development over the life span.

Life Span

Although career development, like physical development, is a lifelong process, it is
unlike physical development in that career development is not ontogenetic. Rather,
careers develop within the context of psychosocial development and societal expec-
tations and against the backdrop of the occupational opportunity structure. Early
in life, career development is relatively homogeneous and age related. Most young
people are enrolled in educational institutions that require them to make decisions at
specific grade levels (e.g,, students in eighth grade must select a curriculum of study
for high school, students leaving high school must make choices about what they
will do when their secondary-school experience ends). Thus, in childhood and ado-
lescence the term career maturity is used in relationship to career decision-making


--- chapter2/9.jpg ---

50

Crapter 2

readiness. Career development in adulthood, however, is heterogeneous and not
as directly connected to age. Adult careers develop in response to the challenges
presented by changing occupational opportunities and evolving patterns of life-role
participation. Thus, adults may recycle through various career development stages
and tasks, depending on their situations in life. Because career development in adult-
hood is heterogeneous, the term career adaptability (rather than career maturity) is
used when referring to an adult person’s career decision-making readiness. The term
career adaptability reflects the fact that “as adults cope with their changing work and
working conditions, adults make an impact on their environments and their environ-
ments make an impact on them” (Niles, Anderson, & Goodnough, 1998, p. 273).
Just as the self-concept evolves over time, making choosing and adjusting continuous
processes, educational and work environments also change over time, making choos-
ing and adjusting continuous requirements. Complacency becomes the enemy of
effective career self-management. In this sense, career adaptability parallels Piaget’s
model of adaptation based on the two processes of assimilation and accommodation.
Career adaptability also supports the view that adults are “responsible agents act-
ing within dynamic environmental settings” to find ways to effectively manage their
career development (Super & Knasel, 1981, p. 199). Others (e.g., Savickas, 2005)
have elaborated upon Super’s use of the career adaptability construct.

Although Super originally applied “adaptability” to adult career development, it
seems reasonable to suggest that the term career adaptability can also be applied to
children and adolescents. Despite their relative homogeneity in career development
when compared with adults, young people experience differences in their readiness
to cope with career development tasks. Some young people encounter environmental
obstacles (e.g., poverty, racism, sexism) that influence their career development in less-
than-positive ways. Some young people are provided with environmental experiences
(e.g., the opportunity to enroll in outstanding schools, opportunities to engage in mul-
tiple recreational and co-curricular school activities) that foster career development.
Differences in contextual “affordances” (Vondracek, Lerner, & Schulenberg, 1986)
have implications for career development. Thus, career adaptability seems a more fit-
ting term for young people than does career maturity. Savickas (1997) agrees and states
that “career adaptability should replace career maturity as the critical construct in the
developmental perspective” (p. 247). We concur with Savickas’ recommendation.

In describing the process of career development over the life span, Super drew on
the research of Buehler (1933), Miller and Form (1951), and Havighurst (1953). Super
conceptualized career as “the life course of a person encountering a series of develop-
mental tasks and attempting to handle them in such a way as to become the kind of
person he or she wants to become” (Super, 1990, pp. 225-226). Super identified the
series of developmental tasks that are typically encountered and related them to stages
and substages of career development. The stages of career development, in their typi-
cal sequence, are growth (childhood), exploration (adolescence), establishment (early
adulthood), maintenance (middle adulthood), and disengagement (late adulthood).

GROWTH. Children ages 4 to 13 are confronted with the career development tasks
of developing a beginning sense of self and a basic understanding of the world-
of-work. In so doing, children progress through the substages of fantasy, interest,


--- chapter2/10.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND ApplvING THEORIES OF Career Development 517

and capacity. They progress through these substages by using their innate sense of
curiosity, first to engage in occupational fantasies, and then, through exploring their
environment (e.g., home, school, parental, and peer relationships). Their curiosity
leads them to acquire information about work and about their own interests and ca-
pacities. When things go well, children begin to develop a sense of mastery and con-
trol over their environment and in their ability to make decisions. Moving through
the growth stage, children begin to realize the importance of planning for the future
and that their behavior in the present influences their future lives, Moreover, they
are increasingly able to use what they have learned about themselves and work to
explore the viability of various educational and occupational opportunities.

EXPLORATION. Using self and occupational information, and their heightened
sense of awareness that the present influences the future, adolescents ages 14 to 24
turn to planning for the future. Within the career development domain, future plan-
ning involves addressing the tasks of crystallizing and specifying occupational prefer-
ences. Once a preference is specified, people tuen to implementing an occupational
choice. These tasks occur within the substages of tentative, transition, and trial (with
litle commitment), respectively.

Crystallizing an occupational preference requires people to clarify the type of
work they would enjoy. The process of crystallization builds upon the occupational
and self-information acquired during the growth stage. Using this information,
people focus on acquiring more in-depth occupational information to explore the
degree to which specific occupations may allow for self-concept implementation.
Thus, accurate self-understanding is essential for identifying appropriate occupa-
tional preferences.

The process of specifying occupational preferences requires the ability to make
decisions by choosing from among the occupations being considered. The process
of implementing varies, depending on what choice has been specified. Some choices
require further training and education in order to gain entry into an occupation.
Other choices provide the opportunity for direct entry into an occupation. Regard-
less of the choice, implementing requires taking action toward getting started in one’s
chosen occupational field.

ESTABLISHMENT. Getting established in a career generally occurs from about
age 25 to age 45. The career development tasks associated with this stage are sta-
bilizing, consolidating, and advancing. Stabilizing begins immediately after entering
an occupation as one evaluates whether the occupational preference one has imple-
mented provides adequate opportunity for self-concept expression. Specifically, one
must assess the organizational culture and determine whether he or she possesses
the skills and interests necessary to succeed in the occupation he or she has entered.
As one becomes more stabilized in an occupation, he or she turns attention away
from questioning whether the choice was a good one and begins to focus on becom-
ing a dependable producer and developing a positive reputation in the occupation
{i.e., consolidating). Focusing on becoming a dependable producer often leads to the
opportunity to move into a position of higher pay and responsibility (i.e., advancing).
The reputation for successful performance one sought to develop is now achieved.


--- chapter2/11.jpg ---

52. Cuarter 2

It is important to note, however, that at any time in this process a person may
decide that the occupational choice he or she made is no longer a good one. If this oc-
curs, recycling to exploration occurs so that a more appropriate occupational choc
can be crystallized, specified, and implemented.

MAINTENANCE, During maintenance (approximately ages 45 to 65), workers en-
counter the career development tasks of holding, updating, and innovating. Many
people are confronted with the choice of either keeping up with the advancements in
their field to maintain or improve their level of performance or opting for a change
in occupational fields. In the latter instance, workers must recycle through exploration-
and establishment-stage tasks. In the former (i.e., holding), workers turn their atten-
tion to updating their skills and applying new skills in innovative ways within their
current occupations. Those who decide to stay in their current occupations but not
to update their skills often become poor performers and stagnate in their work (i.e.,
they become “stuck” at the holding task). In these instances, career interventions ad-
dressing career renewal are required. Those who update and innovate often become
excellent mentors to less experienced workers.

DISENGAGEMENT. At some point toward the end of the maintenance stage, often
as physical capacities begin to decline, interest in work activities begins to wane.
Workers become more concerned with planning for retirement living. Thus, the
disengagement stage involves the career development tasks of deceleration, retire-
ment planning, and retirement living. As workers begin decelerating from their work
activities (currently at about age 65), they tend to become concerned about their life-
styles and activities in retirement. Often, these concerns contain physical, spiritual,
and financial considerations.

Although career development stage theory originally represented a more linear
version of career development, Super readily acknowledged that recycling through,
career stages and tasks occurs with frequency throughout one’s life, thereby sug-
gesting a process that could be linear in nature, but in all likelihood will not be for
most people. We suggest a further cefining of stage theory. Specifically, we make two
recommendations regarding using Super’s stage theory in career counseling. First,
we suggest that career practitioners understand that people can be concerned with
multiple career development tasks and multiple stages simultaneously. Second, we
recommend that career practitioners conceptualize stages in a fashion that is similar
to the notion of “status.” Regarding the former, it is not hard to imagine, for ex-
ample, that people can be concerned about deciding what they will do next in their
careers (i.e., exploration) while also being concerned about whether they will have
the resources to survive financially in retirement (i.e., disengagement). Such a person
is likely to explore more narrowly than another person who may only be concerned
with exploration stage tasks, We think that understanding the constellation of ca-
reer concerns a client or student experiences at any point in time provides important
information regarding the sort of support and resources the client will find useful.
Viewing the client’s constellation of career concerns from the perspective of status
moves away from linear notions of career stage theory and helps reinforce the point
that career tasks present themselves to persons in ways that are not always restricted



--- chapter2/12.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING ANO ApptvING THEORIES OF Carcer Develorment — 53

by chronological age. Thus, Super’s stages and tasks provide important information
regarding the potential array of career concerns, or societal expectations, that a per-
son may be attempting to cope with at any point in his or her life. Understanding the
life span segment of Supet’s theory in this way will foster a greater understanding of
a person’s career development experience.

Life Space

While workers are busy earning a living, they are also busy living a life (Super et al.,
1996). The “simultaneous combination of life roles we play constitutes the lifestyle;
their sequential combination structures the life space and constitutes the life cycle.
The total structure is the career pattern” (Super, 1980, p. 288). Life roles interact
so that the same job holds different meanings for two individuals who live in differ-
ent situations, For example, the meaning and purpose your professor finds in his or
her job is influenced by previous roles your professor has played in life (e.g., child,
student, worker in previous occupations) as well as the current roles your professor
is playing (e.g., partner, parent, child, homemaker, sibling, friend). Because of the
life roles each professor plays, your professor’s dedication to work, and the way in
which he or she defines the work role, may differ from someone else’s who is also a
professor.

The salience people attach to the constellation of life roles they play defines what
Super referred to as the “life structure.” The life-space segment of Super’s theory
acknowledges that people differ in the degree of importance they attach to work. Un-
fortunately, as we mentioned in Chapter 1, many people link work with self-worth
in such a way that devalues the various life roles that have so much to contribute to
one’s sense of self-esteem and self-efficacy (not to mention to society). Many models
of career counseling have disregarded the effects of life-role interactions and the fact
that effective participation in multiple life roles allows for maximal! opportunities
for values expression.

Super noted that people tend to play nine major roles throughout their lives, In
approximate chronological order these roles are: (1) son or daughter, (2) student,
(3) leisurite, (4) citizen, (5) worker, (6) spouse (or partner), (7) homemaker, (8) par-
ent, and (9} pensioner. The individual’s career comprises the total constellation of
life roles engaged in over the course of a lifetime (Super, 1980, p. 284). Life roles
are generally played out in specific theaters. These theaters are: (1) the home, (2) the
school, (3) the workplace, and (4) the community.

Effective life-role participation is very difficult to achieve. Conflicting life-role
demands make effective life-role participation feel like a “moving target.” At vari-
ous times, priority must be given to specific life roles. Sometimes deciding which role
takes priority is relatively easy (e.g., giving priority to one’s job when there are low
demands from one's children) and sometimes not (e.g., when the demands from job
and family are concurrently high). At times, life roles typically played in one theater
spill over into another theater and create conflict (Eagle, Miles, & Icenogle, 1997;
Loscocco, 1997; Perrone, 2005). For example, when work spills over from the work-
place to the home, the roles of worker, partner, and parent become enmeshed and
insufficient attention is paid to each role. Thus, life roles interact in ways that can be


--- chapter2/13.jpg ---

54

Crapter 2

extensive or minimal: supportive, supplementary, compensatory, or neutral. Life is
best when the life roles we play nurture each other and offer opportunities for us to
express our values. Life is stressful when the life roles we play are at odds with each
other and provide little opportunity for us to express what we value.

Thus, it is not surprising that many career counseling clients present with con-
cerns related to life-structure issues. That is, many of them are seeking assistance
in coping more effectively with changing life-role demands. For such clients, career
interventions that address only one life role—work—are inadequate. Super’s theory
embraces this fact by focusing on how clients structure the basic roles of work, play,
friendship, and family into a life that is satisfying (Super et al., 1996).

Self-Concepts

Super defined self-concept as a “picture of the self in some role, situation, or position,
performing some set of functions, or in some web of relationships” (1963, p. 18).
Super (1980) uses the Archway Model and the Life-Career Rainbow to depict the
various personal (e.g., aptitudes, values, needs) and situational (e.g, the family, the
community, the economy, society) determinants that shape the constellation of life
roles that individuals play over the course of a life span and that interact to influence
the development of the person’s self-concepts. In these models, Super delineates both
the longitudinal processes of career development as well as the more situation-specific
content of career decision making. Career decisions reflect our attempts at translating
our self-understanding {i.e., our self-concepts) into career terms (Super, 1984).

Self-concepts contain both objective and subjective elements. Objectively, we
develop self-understanding by comparing ourselves with others (e.g., “I am like
accountants in that | am good with numbers” or “I am in the 95th percentile on
mechanical ability”). Subjectively, we develop understanding through focusing on
our uniqueness emerging out of the life stories we construct. Our life stories repre-
sent our efforts at constructing meaning from our life experiences. There is relative
homogeneity in our objective career experience (e.g., almost everyone reading this
book is focused on acquiring the occupational title of counselor or counseling psy-
chologist). There is tremendous heterogeneity in our subjective career experience
(e.g., everyone reading this book has a unique history of personal experience that has
led him or her to the place of wanting to work within the helping professions). We
use our objective and subjective understanding to identify appropriate career goals.
Such understanding guides us as we make choices about the degree and the nature
of our life-role participation. Because self-concepts continue to develop over time,
the need to make choices and the process of adjusting to the choices implemented
represent lifelong tasks.

Applying Super’s Theory

Toward the end of his career, Super increasingly focused on translating his theory
into practice (Super et al., 1992). As noted, Super labeled his approach the Career
Development Assessment and Counseling (C-DAC) model. Like other theorists (e.g.,
Holland, Krumboltz), Super translated his theory into practice, in part, through the
systematic application of career assessment instruments emanating from each of his


--- chapter2/14.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND AppwvinG THEORES CF Career Development = 55

theory segments. Although these assessment instruments are key elements in the
C-DAC model, they are not required for addressing Super’s theory segments in career
counseling. (It is important to note that many of the C-DAC assessment instruments
are available for no cost at vocopher.com.)

The primary emphasis of the C-DAC model (and the traditional focus of career
counseling) is on helping clients cope with concerns arising within the exploration
stage of the life-span theory segment (Super, 1957; Super et al., 1996). Many people
associate exploration only with adolescents who are at the preimplementation stage
of career development; however, exploration continues throughout life: “Explora-
tion has come to be expected not only in adults who are changing career direction,
but also in adults who are responding to the demands of progressing in the career
they have chosen and in which they wish to remain” (Phillips, 1982, p. 130).

Persons encountering the exploration stage for the first time focus on clarifying
their values, skills, and interests, and connecting these attributes to initial occupa-
tional options. Formal standardized assessments can be very useful in providing
initial career explorers with foundational self-information required for coping
effectively with exploration stage tasks. However, persons recycling through the
exploration stage use exploratory behavior to resolve a wide variety of career
issues (Niles et al., 1998). For example, some people use exploratory behavior to
maintain their current positions while they focus on retirement living. Others use
exploration to start over in new occupations, whereas still others use exploratory
behavior to become more innovative in their current positions. As we noted earlier,
it is not uncommon for people to experience career concerns across multiple career
stages concurrently. It is important to note, therefore, that understanding the full
range of a client’s career concerns provides important information regarding the
career tasks with which the client is attempting to cope. Although exploration
always involves learning more about our situation, or ourselves, what needs to be
learned depends on our developmental status and salient life roles (Super, 1983).
Career development rarely occurs ina linear fashion. Thus, identifying each client's
constellation of developmental task concerns is an important first step in construct-
ing appropriate career interventions,

For example, Juanita (presented at the beginning of the chapter) is confronting
the career development tasks of crystallizing and specifying occupational preferences
for the first time (i.e., she is an “initial career explorer”). To cope effectively with
the exploration-stage tasks, Juanita will need to acquire much more self-information
(e.g., values, interests, and abilities) and information about the world-of-work. She
may also need to learn about the career decision-making process (i.e., how good
career decisions are made). Then she will need assistance in translating the infor-
mation she acquires into a career plan. That is, she must be able to make concrete
connections between this information and her future career, It is hoped that in the
process of developing a career plan, Juanita will also be able to make connections
between her school activities and her future, thereby becoming more motivated at
school. As Juanita crystallizes her occupational self-concept, she will need to reality-
test her tentative choices. Activities such as role playing, participating in schoot
clubs, job shadowing, volunteering, and part-time employment will be useful to her
in increasing her self-knowledge and occupational information.


--- chapter2/15.jpg ---

56

Carrer 2

To measure concern with life-span career development stages and tasks with
adult clients, Super and his colleagues developed the Adult Career Concerns Inven-
tory (ACCT) (Super, Thompson, & Lindeman, 1988). The ACCI measures planful-
ness or concern for the developmental tasks of the four career stages of exploration,
establishment, maintenance, and disengagement posited in life-span, life-space the-
ory (Super et al., 1988). Each career stage includes three tasks, which respondents
rate in terms of level of concern using a 5-point Likert-type scale ranging from 1 (no
concern) to 5 (great concern) with the associated task. For example, the exploration
stage consists of the tasks of crystallization, specification, and implementation. The
tasks for each of the stages are arranged in 5-item substages, resulting in a total of
60 items. Summing each set of three-task substage scores yields a total score for the
corresponding career stage.

The ACCT is useful at the onset of career counseling to identify clients’ develop-
mental task concerns and for identifying the exploratory resources that may be of
most use in helping clients cope effectively with their career concerns. For example,
clients concerned with the task of updating can be encouraged to attend meetings
and seminars on new methods in their fields, to visit places where they can see new
developments in their fields, to conduct information interviews with knowledgeable
people, and to take refresher training (items 36 to 40, respectively, on the Updating
Scale of the ACCI). Counselors can use ACCI scores to identify the client’s career
development status regarding the constellation of career concerns with which the
client is attempting to cope.

Some clients, however, may be unable to make career choices due to the fact
that they lack the resources necessary for choosing (e.g., adolescents may be lacking
career maturity and adults may be lacking career adaptability). Individuals who are
not ready to make good career choices need to (a) develop positive attitudes toward
career exploration and planning, (b) learn how to gather information about them-
selves and occupational options, and (c) learn how to make career decisions.

The Career Development Inventory (CDI) (Thompson, Lindeman, Super,
Jordaan, & Myers, 1984) assesses whether high school and college students are
ready to make career decisions, Specifically, the CDI assesses career planning, career
exploration, world-of-work information, and knowledge of career decision-making
principles. Scores indicate the client’s degree of readiness for career decision making.
CDI scores can be used to answer questions such as: Does the respondent know how
to make career decisions? Is the respondent aware of the need to make career plans?
Does the respondent possess both general information about the world-of-work and
specific information about the preferred occupation? Does the respondent know how
to make use of exploratory resources for gathering information relevant to the career
decision-making process?

High scores on the CDI scales indicate affirmative answers to these questions (i.e,
that the client has been involved in making career plans, possesses occupational infor-
mation, has used exploratory resources effectively, and knows how to make decisions).
In such instances, clients are often able to proceed with career decision making,

Low scores on CDI scales indicate deficiencies that must be remediated prior
to proceeding with career decision making. For example, a low CDI score suggests
that the client is not aware of the need to make a career choice and is not involved


--- chapter2/16.jpg ---

UINDERSTANDING AND ApptyinG THEORIES OF Career Development 57

in planning for the future. Low scores related to occupational information indicate
the need to become more aware of occupational requirements and tasks. Using the
CDI with Juanita will help identify specific areas in which she may need assistance in
becoming ready to make career decisions (i.e., in developing career maturity).

The next step in applying the C-DAC model involves determining the priority
clients attach to the life roles they play. This step in the C-DAC model distinguishes
Super’s approach from most other career counseling models because it helps clients
understand how they “structure the basic roles of work, play, friendship, and family
into a life” (Savickas, 1993, p. 211).

Achieving this understanding involves exploring the importance, or salience, cli-
ents attach to their life roles. It also means realizing that the problems clients present
in career counseling cannot be precisely categorized as reflecting either “personal”
or “career” concerns, Because few issues are more personal than those related to
career choice and adjustment, it is not surprising that career and noncareer concerns
overlap substantially (Betz & Corning, 1993; Krumboltz, 1993; Subich, 1993; Super,
1993). Research supports this perspective by indicating that clients seeking career
counseling often experience high levels of psychological stress and discuss concerns
related to nonwork roles throughout the duration of the career counseling process
(Anderson & Niles, 1995; Lucas, 1993; Niles & Anderson, 1993). Such findings
point to the importance of attending to the emotional issues clients encounter as they
cope with problems emerging in the context of their unique life structures.

Counselors can encourage clients to examine the personal meaning they attach
to the life roles they play by asking questions such as: How do you spend your time
during a typical week? How important are the different roles of life to you? What
do you like about participating in each of the life roles you play? What life roles do
you think will be important to you in the future? What do you hope to accomplish
in each of the life roles that will be important to you in the future? What life roles
do members of your family play? What do your family members expect you to ac-
complish in each of the life roles? What helpful (and not so helpful) lessons have you
learned about playing each life role? Questions such as these would be important to
discuss with Juanita to help her consider what life roles will be important to her in the
future and what she can do in the present to begin preparing for those life roles. Ask-
ing clients to describe how they spend their time in the course of a typical week and
then to consider the values reflected in their weekly activities is also a useful strategy
for inviting clients to consider life-structure issues in career counseling. Counselors
can also encourage clients to describe how they would like to spend their time at
some future point (e.g., five years in the future), The counselor can then encourage
the client to engage in planning by identifying specific steategies for increasing the
probability that the future life-steucture scenario will occur.

Counselors can also use the Salience Inventory (Super & Nevill, 1986) as a start-
ing point for discussing life-role salience. The Salience Inventory measures the rela-
tive importance of five life roles (student, worker, citizen, homemaker, and leisurite)
on three dimensions, one behavioral and two affective. The behavioral component,
Participation, assesses what the individual does or has done recently in each of the
life roles. The first affective component, Commitment, requires the inventory-taker
to indicate how he or she feels about each of the five life roles. The second affective



--- chapter2/17.jpg ---

58

Crarter 2

component, Values Expectations, requires the respondent to indicate the degree to
which there will be opportunities now or in the future to express important values
in each of the life roles.

Finally, life-role activities can be examined using the “Pie of Life” exercises. In
the Pie of Life activity, clients divide a circle into “slices” reflecting the amount of
time they spend in various life activities during the course of a typical week, They are
then asked to identify the values that they think are reflected in their life pie. After
listing the values, the counselor and client then discuss how the client feels about
the values exposed in the slices of pie. The counselor focuses on reinforcing the time
spent in activities that the client feels good about and explores changes the client can
make in Pie of Life slices that do not reflect the client’s value structure. The counselor
and client can also discuss what the client would like to accomplish in each of the life
roles that are important to the client. They can then focus on what the client needs to
do to increase the chances of accomplishing the life-role goals identified.

To further guide the self-concept crystallization process, career counselors can
use the Values Scale (VS) (Nevill & Super, 1986). The VS measures 21 intrinsic (e.g.,
creativity, altruism) and extrinsic (¢.g., economic rewards) values individuals hope
to express in their life roles. Counselors can use the results of the VS to help clients
focus their exploration on life roles and occupational options, Thus, the VS can be
a useful supplement to measures of interests and abilities for clients attempting to
crystallize work and life goals.

‘With the information provided by the Salience Inventory and the Values Scale,
counselors help clients identify the life roles in which they are currently spending
most of their time, those to which they are emotionally committed, the values they
hope to express in their life roles, and the life roles they expect to be important to
them in the future.

With regard to the latter, counselors can help clients construct strategies for
preparing for their salient life roles. For example, if the life role of worker is one that
Juanita expects to be salient in her future, she can discuss ways to plan and prepare
for that role. She can identify present activities that can help her develop her readi-
ness for the role of worker. Special attention can be given to helping Juanita make
connections between her current life role as a student and her future as a worker.
Information from the Salience Inventory can also be used to encourage Juanita to
think proactively about areas of potential role conflict and discuss strategies for cop-
ing with excessive demands from multiple life roles.

Contextual Factors Influencing Life-Role Salience

Super’s Archway model suggests that life-role self-concepts are shaped by our con-
texts (ie., personal and situational determinants). However, many individuals lack
an awareness of the ways in which contextual factors (e.g., the dominant culture,
culture of origin) interact with identity development to shape life-role salience
(Blustein, 1994).

DOMINANT CULTURE. Often persons simply “inherit” patterns of life-role salience
that are passed on from the dominant or popular culture. Such inheritances can be


--- chapter2/18.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND ApplyinG THECRIes OF Career Deverorment 59

problematic when they are embedded in beliefs based on gender, racial, and other
stereotypes. For example, researchers have consistently found gender bias in life-
role salience and occupational sex-role stereotyping in portrayals of workers in the
popular culture. With regard to the former, Niles and Goodnough (1996) reported
in a literature review that researchers have consistently found gender differences
in role salience that coincide with traditional sex-role expectations (e.g., women
participating more in home and family and expecting more from this life cole than
men). Women who have high salience for the worker role are placed at an obvious
disadvantage in the workforce by such traditional expectations. Also, men limit their
opportunities for participating in the home and family when they adhere to tradi-
tional expectations for life-role salience. Concerning sex-role stereotyping, Coltrane
and Adams (1997) found that women are typically portrayed in popular culture as
unemployed or employed in service or clerical occupations, thus perpetuating gender
inequality in the workplace. Raising client awareness regarding the influence of the
dominant culture on patterns of life-role salience helps clients minimize the influence
of racist beliefs and sexist attitudes on their career decision making.

CULTURE OF ORIGIN. Discussions related to the influence of the dominant culture
on life-role salience can also lead to discussions focusing on how clients’ cultural
backgrounds influence their career development. Counselors and clients can explore
how cultures of origin influence the values expressed in life roles (e.g., seeking to
express self-actualization in work for the individual from a Eurocentric cultural
background or seeking to express cultural identity in work for the individual from
an Asian background}, When these discussions occur in small groups, they stimulate
increased awareness of, and sensitivity to, cultural diversity in life-role salience.

This type of exploration can also lead to exploring the various cultural prescrip-
tions {e.g., Eurocentric men are expected to be “good providers” and upwardly
mobile in their occupations) that are generally assigned to specific life roles. In these
discussions, counselors can encourage clients to identify how they perceive and in-
terpret the role expectations emanating from their cultures of origin and how these
expectations influence their decisions as to whether a particular life role is important.
Special attention can be paid to exploring how these expectations influence the cli-
ent’s understanding of the behaviors required for effective role performance (e.g.,
men who define their parenting role primarily as being a good provider can consider
whether this behavior is sufficient for good parenting).

One specific activity for discussing these topics is suggested by Borodovsky and
Ponterotto (1994). They have found the family genogram to be a usefut tool for
exploring the interaction between family background, cultural prescriptions, and
career planning. The genogram provides a tool for tracking career decisions across
generations and identifying sources of important career beliefs and life themes that
people have acquired.

‘This technique can be expanded to address the same topics for other life roles,
That is, by using the genogram, counselors can encourage clients to identify the
beliefs and life themes pertaining to specific life roles (e.g., parent, and citizen) that
they have acquired from members of their immediate and extended families. Coun-
selors can also use the information provided by clients to contrast the influences on


--- chapter2/19.jpg ---

60

Cuarrer 2

life-role salience emanating from group-oriented cultures with influences from more
individualistic cultures. Terms such as “cultural assimilation” and “cultural accom-
modation” can be introduced in these discussions. The effects of sex-role stereotyp-
ing on life-role salience can also be examined in these discussions. The goal of these
interventions is to increase client awareness as to the factors influencing their beliefs
about the primary roles of life so they can make informed decisions about their future
life-role participation.

Although examining life-role participation more holistically is very important,
the central concern in career development interventions continues to be helping cli-
ents clarify their occupational self-concepts. In the C-DAC model, clients use their
understanding of life-role salience as a foundation on which to build as they move
forward with clarifying and articulating their vocational identities.

Vocational identities are clarified using two methods: the actuarial method
{Super, 1954, 1957) and the developmental method (Super, 1954, 1961}. The
actuarial method relates to the trait-and-factor approach of using test scores to
predict future occupational performance and satisfaction. For instance, Juanita
might be given an interest inventory, such as the Strong Interest Inventory (SII)
(Harmon, Hansen, Borgen, & Hammer, 1994), to compare her interests with those
of people already employed in various occupations. Using the actuarial method, the
counselor “acts like an actuary, consults tables, graphs, and formulas seeking the
optimal prediction, in probability terms, based on the observed correlations with
similar performances of other people” (Jepsen, 1994, p. 45). Juanita’s pattern of
interests would be related to the patterns of workers within a variety of occupa-
tions. The counselor would focus on similar patterns {as starting points for further
exploration) and dissimilar patterns (to identify types of occupations Juanita is
not likely to find satisfying). Ability tests could be used in the same way. Juanita’s
abilities can be compared with the abilities required for successful performance in
specific occupations. Occupations for which her interests and abilities merge to
predict satisfying and successful performance can be identified and focused on for
further consideration,

Values inventory results or values card sorts can then be used to guide further
exploration. Some occupations might be appropriate for a client’s interests and
abilities, but they may not provide sufficient opportunities for values expression. For.
clients like Juanita who are attempting to crystallize occupational preferences, values
inventories or values card sorts may be especially helpful supplements to results from
measures of interests and abilities (Super et al., 1996).

Using the developmental method (which Super also described as the Thematic-
Extrapolation Method), counselors act more like historians (rather than actuaries)
by inviting clients to construct autobiographical stories of development. Specifically,
clients construct chronologies of what they did in the past. These life histories are
then examined for recurrent themes or “threads of continuity” that are used to
“make sense of the past, explain the present, and draw a blueprint for the future”
(Super et al., 1996, p. 157). Whereas the actuarial method is based on traits (e.g.,
How do my traits compare with the traits of others? In what occupations do my
traits predict success?), the developmental method is based on life patterns (e.g.,
What patterns are revealed in my life history? Which of these patterns and themes


--- chapter2/20.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND ApplyING THEORIES OF Career Development 61

are important to incorporate in my future planning?). Jepsen (1994) has noted that
the developmental or thematic-extrapolation method contains three distinct steps:

1. Analyze past behavior and development for recurring themes and underlying
trends.

2. Summarize each theme and trend, taking into account the other themes and
trends.

3. Project the modified themes and trends into the future by extrapolation. (p. 45)

Encouraging the client to consider his or her life as if it were a book and then
asking the client to identify the “chapters of his or her life” is a strategy for identify-
ing recurring life themes and underlying trends. The future can then be described as
“chapters that must be lived for the client to feel as if his or her life is complete” and
the focus can shift toward identifying future goals and aspirations.

The actuarial and developmental methods can be incorporated into careet coun-
seling by using Supec’s (1957) cyclical model of nondirective and directive methods.
Super noted that: “Since vocational development consists of implementing a self-
concept, and since self-concepts often need modification before they can be imple-
mented, it is important that the student, client, or patient put his [sic] self-concept
into words early in the counseling process. The client needs to do this for himself, to
clarify his actual role and his role aspirations; he needs to do it for the counselor, so
that the counselor may understand the nature of the vocational problem confronting
him” (p. 308). Specifically, Super (1957) described the cycles of career counseling
as follows:

1. Nondirective problem exploration and self-concept portrayal (i.e., the client tells
his or her story)

2. Directive topic setting, for further exploring (i.e., the counselor and client clarify
the career concerns and identify which concerns will be the initial focus of career
counseling)

3. Nondirective reflection and clarification of feeling for self-acceptance and insight
(i.e., the career counselor uses empathic responding and basic counseling skills to
help the client clarify his or her situation, feclings, and thoughts)

4. Directive exploration for factual data from tests, occupational pamphlets, extra-

curricular experiences, grades, and so forth, for reality testing (i.e., the counselor

and client collect relevant information regarding the client’s characteristics and
potential occupational options; they also identify options for reality testing or

“trying out” potential options via job shadowing, occupational information

interviewing, voluntecring, and externships)

Nondirective exploration and working through of attitudes and feelings aroused

by reality testing (i.e., the client tries out potential options and then reflects upon

the experiences with the counselor, focusing on the client’s thoughts and feelings
and how the experience may inform the client in terms of next steps)

6. Nondirective consideration of possible actions, for help in decision making (i.c.,
the client identifies what she or he will do next to move forward in her or his
career development}. (p. 308)

w

Essentially, che career counseling model articulated by Super emphasizes helping
clients to clarify and articulate their self-concepts and then move toward implement-
ing their self-concepts in appropriate life-role activity. Specific career counseling


--- chapter2/21.jpg ---

62

Cxarrer 2

interventions, such as the C-DAC model and the thematic extrapolation method, can
be incorporated into Super’s cyclical model {most likely at steps 3-6).

Evaluating Super’s Theory

Super’s theory continues to stimulate career development research. For example,
Lewis, Savickas, and Jones (1996) used the Career Development Inventory (Super,
Thompson, Lindeman, Jordaan, & Myers, 1981) to predict success in medical
school. Their results supported Super’s (1981) contention that having a future ori-
entation and being planful are important ingredients for achieving career maturity
and career adaptability.

Reviewing literature pertaining to Super’s Work Importance Study led Niles and
Goodnough (1996) to three conclusions. First, life-role salience and values must be
viewed within specific developmental and cultural contexts. Second, in diverse set-
tings, and with different groups, there are sex differences related to the relative im-
portance of life roles and values. And, third, in order to facilitate their clients’ career
development, counselors must attend to life-role salience and values issues in career
counseling (see also Parasuraman, Purhoit, Godshalk, & Beutell, 1996).

Salomone (1996) provided a historical perspective by tracing the evolution of
three key segments of Super’s theory over a 40-year period: (a) theoretical proposi-
tions, (b) conceptualization of the career stages, and (c) definition of career. Salomone’s
review led him to several conclusions. First, Super’s theoretical propositions have not
changed substantially in 40 years. Second, there is the need for more research related
to Super’s propositions and career stage model. Finally, Salomone noted that Super’s
contributions represent an unparalleled legacy in developmental career theory. Ad-
ditionally, Super’s theory segments provide a useful framework for helping clients
clarify their life-role identities and the values they seek to express in their life roles.
Moreover, Super’s theory provides a useful framework for researchers investigating
the process of life-role identity development.

A number of journal articles provide examples of the systematic application of
the C-DAC assessment instrument. For example, articles by Nevill and Kruse (1996)
(Values Scale), Nevill and Calvert (1996) (Salience Inventory), Savickas and Hartung
(1996) (Career Development Inventory), and Cairo, Kritis, and Myers (1996) (Adult
Career Concerns Inventory) provide useful fiterature reviews, test descriptions, and
information concerning the practical application of each assessment in career coun-
seling practice. Hartung et al. (1998) describe strategies for appraising the client’s
cultural identity in the initial stages of the C-DAC model and offer techniques for
considering cultural factors throughout the C-DAC process, thereby making the
model more applicable to clients representing diverse contexts.

Commenting on Super’s theory and the research it has generated, Osipow and
Fitzgerald (1996) noted that Super’s theory “has the virtue of building upon aspects
of the mainstream of developmental psychology and personality theory and has
considerable utility for practice and research” (p. 143). They also noted that “most
of the research reported on Super’s theory generally supports his model” (p. 143).
Borgen (1991) noted that Super’s theory “has splendidly stood the test of time”
(p. 278). Brown (1996) pointed out that Super’s theory “will forever be the segmental



--- chapter2/22.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND APPLYING THEORIES OF Career Devetorment 63.

legacy of a brilliant thinker” (p. 522}. The development of the C-DAC model should
provide stronger links between Super’s theory and career development intervention
@ research.

ANNE ROE’S PERSONALITY THEORY OF CAREER CHOICE

Anne Roe (1904-1991), a clinical psychologist, initially became interested in career
behavior through her research investigating personality factors related to artists’
expression of creativity. Roe subsequently expanded her research to eminent scien-
tists. From these investigations, Roe (1956, 1957) suggested that early childhood
experiences influence career behavior. As Brown, Lum, and Voyle (1997) emphasize,
however, from Roe’s perspective the relationship between early childhood experi-
ences and subsequent career behavior is mediated by the “structure of psychological
needs that develop due to the pattern of frustrations and satisfactions experienced in
childhood” (p. 284). Specifically, the resultant need structure orients persons either
toward people or not toward people. Drawing upon Maslow’s (1954) needs theory,
Roe contended that needs not satisfied become important motivators in the occupa-
tional choices people make.

The child-rearing environments to which children are exposed shape early
childhood experiences, Roe identified three primary modes of child rearing or envi-
ronments to which children are exposed: emotional concentration, avoidance, and
acceptance. Emotional concentration on the child ranges from overprotection to
overly demanding behaviors. While physical needs are met, psychological needs may
be withheld as parents place conditions on their love and approval. Children exposed
to overly protective environments learn that conforming elicits rewards and, thus, a
dependence on others for approval and a positive sense of self-esteem is developed.
Overly demanding environments result in the development of perfectionist tenden-

r cies as children learn to adhere to “all-or-nothing” standards. Avoidance of the child,
according to Roe, ranges from neglecting the child’s physical needs to rejecting the
child’s emotional needs. Acceptance of the child involves environments in which the
child’s physical and psychological needs are met. Independence and self-reliance are
encouraged in either an unconcerned, noninvolved way or an active, supportive one.

Each of these climates affects the satisfaction of the child’s needs, which, in turn,
subsequently influences the adult’s choice of occupational field. For example, adults
working in service occupations are oriented toward people and thus were likely
exposed to loving, overprotective early childhood environments, Adults in more
scientific occupational fields are typically not oriented toward people and therefore
were most likely exposed to rejecting and avoidant early childhood environments.

Roe developed an occupational classification system that contains eight fields
based on arts and entertainment, and general culture. Service fields are generally
more people-oriented occupations such as teaching, counseling, and social work.
Business contact occupations involve interpersonal interactions of a persuasive
nature, such as sales, Organizational occupations emphasize systems and manage-
ment. Technology involves occupations such as engineering. Outdoor occupations
focus on the application of scientific principles in outdoor occupations such as for-
est management. Science includes occupations such as chemist and physicist. Arts


--- chapter2/23.jpg ---

64 CHapter 2

and entertainment involves occupations related to acting, musical performance, and
painting. General culture involves occupations that perpetuate the civilization such,
as government occupations. People choose occupational fields based on their need!
structures, which were influenced by the childhood environments that they expe-
rienced, The level of one’s occupation is influenced by factors such as the person’s
genetic structure and socioeconomic background.

Evaluating Roe’s Theory

Largely due to the retrospective nature of Roe’s theory, researchers have been chal-
lenged in their attempts to validate the theory’s assumptions. Variability in a par-
ent’s parental style, variability in each parent’s respective parenting style, variability
in the early life environments experienced by members of the same occupation, and
the inherent challenge in attempting to predict events that are distant in time from
their causal influences have all resulted in little empirical support for Roe’s theory.
When this fact is combined with the reality that Roe’s theory focuses on explaining
factors underlying career choice and does not offer much relative to career interven-
tions, then it is not hard to understand why this theory has largely faded from the
current career development literature. Roe’s theory does, however, point to the role
of parents and the influence of a person’s needs structure in the career development
process.

LINDA GOTTFREDSON’S THEORY OF CIRCUMSCRIPTION,
COMPROMISE, AND SELF-CREATION

One theory that describes the process leading to the formulation of occupational
aspirations in childhood and adolescence is Gottfredson’s theory of circumscription,
compromise, and self-creation (Gottfredson, 2002, 2005). Gottfredson developed,
her theory, in part, to,address the following question: “Why do children seem to re-
create the social inequalities of their elders long before they themselves experience
any barriers to pursuing their dreams?” (Gottfredson, 2002, p. 85). She addresses
the compromises that people make in their career aspirations, particularly as these
compromises relate to sex-typed learning and experiences, Specifically, compromise
involves the process of modifying career choices due to limiting factors, such as
prestige, sex type, and field of interest (Gottfredson, 1981). Gottfredson’s theory
emphasizes the view that “career choice is an attempt to place oneself in the broader
social order” (1996, p, 181}. Thus, she offers a developmental and sociological per-
spective of career development.

Gottfredson (2002) notes that people distinguish occupations according to
the dimensions of: “masculinity-femininity, occupational prestige, and field of
work” (p. 88). Gottfredson (2005) further suggests that occupational prestige
is positively correlated with the degree of intellectual capacity required for
job performance. The person’s self-concept interacts with the person’s occu-
pational stereotypes when making decisions about the perceived compatibility
of different occupations. Compatibility, or the suitability of any occupation, is
determined when the individual considers factors such as the perceived gender


--- chapter2/24.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND AppivinG THEORES OF Career Deverorment 65

appropriateness (most important), prestige (second in importance), and, finally,
the degree to which the occupation will fulfill the person’s preferences and per-
sonality needs (last in importance within the compromise process). The “zone of
acceptable occupational alternatives” or “social space” (2002, p. 91) represents
the person’s conclusions as to his or her fit in society. Gottfredson contends
that people compromise in their search process because they typically search for
an occupational choice that is “good enough,” but not necessarily the best pos-
sible choice. This is because the best possible choice requires substantially more
intensive information gathering related to factors such as values clarification and
determining the accessibility of various occupational alternatives than what is re-
quired for a choice that is “good enough,” People become indecisive when they
perceive the options within their social space as undesirable. Occupational satis-
faction hinges on the degree to which “the compromise allows one to implement
a desired social self, either through the work itself or the lifestyle it allows self and
family” (2002, p. 107).

Circumscription involves the process of eliminating unacceptable occupational
alternatives based primarily on gender and prestige. Circumscription highlights the
fact that young people begin eliminating occupational options from consideration
“as soon as they are able to perceive essential distinctions among people and lives”
(Gottfredson, 2002, p. 131). The circumscription process is guided by five prin-
ciples (2002, pp. 94-95). The first principle notes that circumscription is guided by
the growing capacity of children to understand and organize complex information
about themselves and the world. Children move from magical to abstract thinking
as they develop. The second principle reflects the belief that because occupational
aspirations are inextricably linked with one’s sense of self, occupational prefer-
ences reflect attempts to both implement and enhance one’s self-concept. The third
principle underlying the circumscription process is that children begin to grapple
with more complex distinctions among people (e.g., perceptions related to prestige)
while they are still in the process of integrating more concrete phenomena (e.g.,
sex roles) into their self-conceptions. The fourth circumscription principle empha-
sizes the belief that children progressively eliminate occupational options as their
self-conceptions increase in complexity and clarity. At the same time, Gottfredson
notes that “people reconsider options they have ruled out as unacceptable in sex-
type and prestige only when they are prompted to do so by some formative new
experience or some notable change in their social environment” (2002, p. 95).
Finally, the circumscription process is gradual and typically not immediately obvi-
ous despite its strong effect on the individual. These principles operate throughout
the stages of cognitive development Gottfredson (1996} delineated to describe the
circumscription process.

Stage One: Orientation to Size and Power

The first stage occurs between the ages of 3 and 5 and reflects the onset of object
constancy in cognitive development. At this stage, children classify people in simple
terms, such as big versus little. Thus, children orient themselves to the size difference
between themselves and adults.


--- chapter2/25.jpg ---

66

CHAPTER 2

Stage Two: Orientation to Sex Roles

This stage occurs between the ages of 6 and 8. During this stage, children become
aware of different sex roles between men and women. They think dichotomously
(e.g., good-bad, rich-poor) and interpret sex-role stereotypes as behavioral impera-
tives. Their occupational aspirations also reflect this concern for behaving in ways
that are appropriate for one’s sex (e.g., certain jobs are for boys and certain jobs are
for girls). Thus, it is during this stage that children develop their “tolerable-sextype
boundary” (Gottfredson, 2005).

Stage Three: Orientation to Social Valuation

During this stage, which occurs between the ages of 9 and 13, children are able to
think more abstractly and they become aware of social class and prestige. Occupa-
tions that are not in line with their perceived ability levels and that do not meet with
the approval of their social reference group are no longer considered. The elements
of social class and ability determine the “tolerable-level boundary,” which represents
the lower limit of occupations children in this stage are willing to consider (i.e.,
which occupations are “beneath” them and, therefore, not worthy of their consider-
ation). Children also establish a “tolerable-effort level” based on the upper limit of
effort children are willing to exert and the risks children are willing to take in pur-
suing occupational options (i.e., those occupational goals that are not beyond their
ability to achieve). Together, these levels determine the zone of occupations children
consider as acceptable (Gottfredson, 1996).

Stage Four: Orientation to the Internal, Unique Self

This stage occurs from age 14 to beyond. During this stage, adolescents become
more introspective and self-aware. Now able to engage in more abstract thinking
than in previous stages, adolescents begin identifying internally generated goals
and self-concepts. As Gottfredson notes, “vocational development erupts into con-
scious awareness during Stage 4” (2005, p. 81). Adolescents engage in exploring
occupational options that are congruent with their emerging sense of self. Thus,
this stage represents a shift from the previous stages in that the emphasis turns from
eliminating unacceptable options to identifying options that are most preferred and
acceptable. It is also during this stage that the process of compromise is introduced.
Compromise involves being forced to choose among minimally acceptable occupa-
tional options. Specifically, compromise occurs as preferred occupational options are
eliminated from further consideration due to factors such as the perceived accessibil-
ity of any occupational option. Compromise can be anticipatory (i.¢., prior to actual
encounters with external barriers) or experiential (i.e., after encountering an external
barrier to a preferred option).

Applying Gottfredson’s Theory to Practice

Gottfredson (1996) noted that, traditionally, career development interventions
occur during stage four when people are attempting to crystallize and clarify their self-
concepts. However, Gottfredson’s theory highlights the importance of providing career


--- chapter2/26.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND AppivinG THEORIES OF Career DeveloeMent — 67

development interventions, often in the form of career education programs, to young
people in earlier stages of development. Accordingly, career education programs
should focus on exploring the full range of occupational options to promote systematic
exploration in career choice (Gottfredson}. Clearly, interventions that address occu-
pational sex-role stereotypes and that expose children to options across occupational
levels should be cornerstones of such programs. Specifically, Gottfredson posited that
career education programs need to be sensitive to students’ levels of cognitive develop-
ment; they need to expose students to a wide range of career options, and help them
become aware of the circumscription of alternatives and compromise process.

From Gottfredson’s perspective, a major concern to address in individual career
counseling is the degree to which clients have engaged in the unnecessary restriction
of occupational options. “The problem in compromise is the failure to come to grips
with reality, either by ignoring it or failing to deal with it effectively” (Gottfredson,
1996, p. 217). Gottfredson identified criteria to guide counselors atternpting to clarify
the degree to which their clients may have engaged in the unnecessary restriction of
options. For example, she noted that: clients should be able to identify occupational
options and the relevant self-characteristics required to perform those occupations;
clients should not unnecessarily restrict their occupational options; and they should be
aware of obstacles they may encounter in implementing occupational choices.

In examining these criteria with clients, career counselors can explore their cli-
ents’ tolerable level and effort boundaries, perceptions of barriers, and the contextual
factors influencing clients’ perceptions of acceptable career options, Gottfredson ad-
vocates incorporating discussions of ability more explicitly into the career counseling
process. Despite the fact that ability is a strong predictor of career success, it is often
not highlighted in career counseling. Gottfredson (2003) contends that avoiding
the discussion of ability restricts the usefulness of career counseling. When ability
is integrated into the career counseling experience for adolescents, it can also help
them to see the importance of school performance and career achievement, thereby
increasing their academic motivation and engagement.

Applying Gottfredson’s criteria to Juanita’s case, it is important that the coun-
selor explore with her what occupational options she has considered thus far {in
addition to being in a band). It would also be important to build upon Juanita’s
strengths and interests. Understanding her interests in artistic endeavors might be a
good starting point. In discussing these interests, the counselor can assess whether
Juanita has unnecessarily restricted her options. Her counselor can also address ques-
tions such as: Is her ability sufficient for a performance career? Is Juanita aware of the
obstacles likely to be encountered in pursuing this option? Has Juanita considered
additional opportunities for expressing her values, interests, and abilities? What has
caused her to eliminate other occupational options from further consideration? The
counselor can support and challenge Juanita as she becomes increasingly aware of
her emerging sense of self and her attempts to identify congruent options.

Evaluating Gottfredson’s Theory

Research related to Gottfredson’s theory has not been extensive. Moreover, research
activity related to the theory seems to be in decline and existing research results


--- chapter2/27.jpg ---

68

Carter 2

have been equivocal. Much of the research has focused on circumscription related
to social class, gender, and intelligence. For example, using a sample of Canadian
twelfth-grade students, Hannah and Kahn (1989) found that students from higher
social classes held higher aspirations than students from lower social classes. Helwig
(2001) conducted two studies testing the applicability of Gottfredson’s theory to the
career development of children. This longitudinal research followed students from
second to twelfth grades. In the first study, Helwig examined the occupational aspi-
rations of children and found support for Gottfredson’s theory of circumscription
and compromise. Support for Gottfredson’s theory was found in the second study
as well; Helwig reported that students abandoned fantasy occupational ideals in
favor of more realistic occupational aspirations toward the end of their high school
education. Other researchers applaud Gottfredson’s theoretical emphasis on career
development in childhood and gender differences, noting that the theory fills an im-
portant gap in the career literature (McLennan & Arthur, 1999).

Empirical results from a study focusing on New Zealand students between the
ages of 5 and 14, and conducted by Henderson, Hesketh, and Tuffin (1988), did
not support the importance of gender in Gottfredson’s stage two (Orientation to
Sex Roles). Their findings were supportive of the importance of social class in stage
three (Orientation to Social Valuation), A study conducted by Hesketh, Elmslie, and
Kaldor (1990) suggested an alternative model of compromise in which interests were
more important in career choices than either sex type or prestige, because interests
incorporate the latter. Leong and Plake (1990) found that women, more often than
men, opted for cross-sex work rather than same-sex work if the former provided
them with higher prestige. Blanchard and Lichtenberg (2003) studied Gottfredson’s
compromise process and found that study participants who were engaged in a
moderate or high degree of compromise placed an equal amount of importance on
prestige and sex type, thus differing from what the theory purports. The same study
participants did, however, place a greater importance on prestige and sex type than
they did on interests as they considered factors influencing the compromise process.

More recently, Cochran, Wang, Stevenson, Johnson, and Crews (in press) used
data from a longitudinal sample to investigate the relationship between adolescent
occupational aspirations and mid-life career success using Gottfredson’s theory. The
results of this study lend support for the influence of socioeconomic status (SES) and
ability in the formation of occupational aspirations. Occupational aspirations, abil-
ity, and gender were significantly related to career achievement in later life. These
researchers also found that adolescent girls achieved less career success in mid-life
than adolescent boys.

In evaluating Gottfredson’s theory, Brown (1996) noted “the propositions re-
lating to the factors that lead to circumscription and compromise are too general.
The result is that we are left with questions about what actually occurs in the career
choice and selection process” (p. 523). Nonetheless, Gottfredson’s theory provides
many interesting concepts describing boundaries and motivational dimensions re-
lated to the formation of occupational aspirations (Herr et al., 2004). Her theory
also addresses important gaps within the career-related literature (i.e., career devel-
opment in childhood and gender differences). Moreover, Gottfredson’s (2005) more
recent explication of her theory begins to address Brown’s critique regarding the


--- chapter2/28.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND AprivinG THEORES OF Career DevelormenT 69

need for more specificity related to career development processes. Research studies
testing Gottfredson’s theory using a longitudinal and cross-sectional design would
be particularly useful.

JOHN HOLLAND’S THEORY OF TYPES
AND PERSON-ENVIRONMENT INTERACTIONS

Holland’s (1959, 1966, 1973, 1985a, 1997) theory belongs to a long tradition of
theoretical perspectives seeking to describe individual differences in personality
types (e.g., Murray, 1938; Spranger, 1928), Holland’s theory has been described as
structural-interactive “because it provides an explicit link between various personal-
ity characteristics and corresponding job titles and because it organizes the massive
data about people and jobs” (Weinrach, 1984, p. 63). The theory is based on four
basic assumptions:

1, In our culture, most persons can be categorized as one of six types: realistic,
investigative, artistic, social, enterprising, or conventional.

2. There are six kinds of environments: realistic, investigative, artistic, social, enter-
prising, and conventional.

3. People search for environments that will let them exercise their skills and abili-
ties, express their attitudes and values, and take on agreeable problems and roles.

4. A person’s behavior is determined by an interaction between personality and the
characteristics of the environment, (Holland, 1973, pp. 2-4)

From these assumptions it is clear that a key to understanding and using
Holland’s theory is in understanding his typology. A good starting point for this is
to consider how personality types develop. To a large degree, “types produce types”
(Holland, 1973, p. 11). That is, personality types are both genetically and environ-

r mentally based:

A child’s special heredity and experience first lead to preferences for some kinds of activi-
ties and aversions to others. Later, these preferences become well-defined interests from
which the person gains self-satisfaction as well as reward from others. Still later, the pur-
suit of these interests leads to the development of more specialized competencies as well
as to the neglect of other potential competencies. At the same time, a person’s differentia-
tion of interests with age is accompanied by a crystallization of correlated values. These
events—an increasing differentiation of preferred activities, interests, competencies, and
values—create a characteristic disposition or personality type that is predisposed to ex-
hibit characteristic behavior and to develop characteristic personality traits. (Holland,
1973, p. 12)

Holland contends that, to a large degree, career interests are an expression
of the individual's personality (Holland, 1959, 1966, 1973, 1985a, 1992). As
Spokane (1996) elaborated, “Interests, however, are complex measures that reflect
personality as well as preferences, values, self-efficacy and so on, Types, then, are
complex theoretical groupings based upon personality and interests” (p. 40).
Personality traits are identified by preferences for leisure activities, school subjects,
avocational interests, and work. To varying degrees, each individual resem-
bles one of six basic personality types. The more one resembles any particular



--- chapter2/29.jpg ---

7O Carrer 2

personality type, the more likely it is that the person will manifest the behaviors
and traits associated with that type (Weinrach, 1984). Following is a discussion
of each of the six personality types defined by Holland (1973, pp. 14~18; 1994,

pp. 2-3).
The Realistic Type

The realistic personality type prefers activities that entail the explicit, ordered, or
systematic manipulation of objects, tools, machines, and animals and has an aversion
to educational or therapeutic activities. The realistic person has mechanical abilities
but may lack social skills. Realistic types prefer jobs such as automobile mechanic,
surveyor, farmer, or electrician. Realistic types are often described as:

conforming, humble, normal, frank, materialistic,
persistent, genuine, modest, practical, hardheaded, natural,
shy, honest, and thrifty.

The Investigative Type

The investigative personality type prefers activities that entail the observational,
symbolic, systematic, and creative investigation of physical, biological, and cultural
phenomena in order to understand and control such phenomena. Investigative types
have an aversion to persuasive, social, and repetitive activities. These tendencies
lead to an acquisition of scientific and mathematical competencies and to a deficit in
leadership ability. Investigative types prefer jobs such as biologist, chemist, physicist,
anthropologist, geologist, or medical technologist. Investigative persons are often
described as:

analytical, independent, modest, cautious, intellectual, @
pessimistic, complex, introverted, precise, critical,
methodical, rational, curious, and reserved.

The Artistic Type

The artistic personality type prefers ambiguous, free, unsystematized activities
that entail the manipulation of physical, verbal, or human materials to create art
forms or products. Artistic persons have an aversion to explicit systematic and
ordered activities, These tendencies lead to an acquisition of artistic competen-
cies in language, art, music, drama, and writing and to a deficit in clerical- or
business-system competencies. Artistic types like jobs such as composer, musi-
cian, stage director, writer, interior decorator, or actor/actress, Artistic persons
are often described as:

complicated, imaginative, introspective, disorderly,
impractical, intuitive, emotional, impulsive, nonconforming,
expressive, independent, open, idealistic, and original.


--- chapter2/30.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND AppiviNG THEORIES OF C.

The Social Type

‘The social personality type prefers activities that entail the manipulation of others
to inform, train, develop, cute, or enlighten. They have an aversion to explicit,
ordered, and systematic activities involving materials, tools, or machines. These
tendencies lead to an acquisition of human relations competencies such as inter-
personal and educational competencies and to a deficit in mechanical and scientific
ability. Social types like jobs such as teacher, religious worker, counselor, clinical
psychologist, psychiatric caseworker, or speech therapist. Social persons are often
described as:

convincing, idealistic, social, cooperative, kind,
sympathetic, friendly, patient, tactful, generous,
responsible, understanding, helpful, and warm.

The Enterprising Type

‘The enterprising personality type prefers activities that entail the manipulation of
others to attain organizational or economic gain. They have an aversion to observa-
tional, symbolic, and systematic activities. These tendencies lead to an acquisition of
leadership, interpersonal, and persuasive competencies and to a deficit in scientific
ability. Enterprising types like jobs such as salesperson, manager, business execu-
tive, television producer, sports promoter, or buyer. Enterprising persons are often
described as:

acquisitive, domineering, optimistic, adventurous,
energetic, pleasure-seeking, agreeable, extroverted,
attention-getting, ambitious, impulsive, self-confident,
sociable, and popular.

The Conventional Type

The conventional personality type prefers activities that entail the explicit, or-
dered, and systematic manipulation of data, such as keeping records, filing mate-
rials, reproducing materials, organizing written and numerical data according to
a prescribed plan, and operating computers to attain organizational or economic
goals, Conventional types have an aversion to ambiguous, free, exploratory, or
unsystematized activities. These tendencies lead to an acquisition of clerical,
computational, and business system competencies and to a deficit in artistic
competencies. Conventional types like jobs such as bookkeeper, stenographer,
financial analyst, banker, cost estimator, or tax expert. Conventional persons
are often described as:

conforming, inhibited, persistent, conscientious, obedient,
practical, careful, orderly, thrifty, efficient, and
unimaginative.



--- chapter2/31.jpg ---

72

Cuarrer 2

Holland (1973) used the same six types to describe occupational environments
(pp. 29-33). For example, the realistic environment requires the explicit, ordered,
or systematic manipulation of objects, tools, machines, and animals. It encourages
people to view themselves as having mechanical ability. It rewards people for display-
ing conventional values and encourages them to see the world in simple, tangible,
and traditional terms.

The investigative environment requires the symbolic, systematic, and creative
investigation of physical, biological, or cultural phenomena. It encourages scientific
competencies and achievements and the perception of the world in complex and
unconventional ways. It rewards people for displaying scientific values.

The artistic environment requires participation in ambiguous, free, and unsys-
tematized activities to create art forms or products. It encourages people to view
themselves as having artistic abilities and to see themselves as expressive, noncon-
forming, independent, and intuitive. It rewards people for the display of artistic
values.

The social environment requires participation in activities that inform, train, de-
velop, cure or enlighten others, It requires people to see themselves as liking to help
others, as being understanding of others, and as seeing the world in flexible ways. It
rewards people for the display of social values.

The enterprising environment requires participation in activities that involve the
manipulation of others to attain organizational and self-interest goals. It requires
people to view themselves as aggressive, popular, self-confident, sociable, and as
possessing leadership and speaking ability. It encourages people to view the world
in terms of power and status and in stereotyped and simple terms. It rewards people
for displaying enterprising goals and values.

The conyentional environment requires participation in activities that involve
the explicit, ordered, or systematic manipulation of data, such as record keeping, fil-
ing materials, and organizing written and numerical data according to a prescribed
plan. It requires people to view themselves as conforming, orderly, nonartistic, and
as having clerical competencies. It rewards people for perceiving the world in stereo-
typed and conventional ways.

Congruence

The key construct in Holland’s theory is that of congruence. Congruence describes
the degree of fit between an individual’s personality type and current or prospective
work environment. A person is in a congruent work environment when the person’s
personality type matches the occupational environment (e.g., a social type working
as a counselor). Conversely, incongruence occurs when individuals are in environ-
ments that do not match their personality types (e.g., a social type working as an
auto mechanic), Individuals tend to be more satisfied and perform better in environ-
ments that match (or are congruent with) their personality types. Thus, congruence is
based on the assumption that “birds of a feather flock together” and that “different
types require different environments” (Holland, 1973, p. 4). Also, “environments
are characterized by the people who occupy them” (Weinrach, 1984, pp. 63-64).
To distinguish “congruence” from Holland’s other constructs, students often find it


--- chapter2/32.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND AppiviING THEORIES OF Cazeer Deve.orment = 73

helpful to view the “u” and “e” in “congruence” as representing the fact that congru-
ence refers to the relationship between “you” and the “environment.”

Holland uses a hexagonal model to represent the relationships within and
between types (Figure 2.1). Concerning the latter, the highest level of congruence
exists when there is a direct correspondence between workers’ personality types
and their work environments (c.g., investigative personality types in investigative
work environments). The next highest level of congruence exists when individuals
are in work environments that are adjacent to their types on the hexagon (e.g., a
realistic personality type in an investigative work environment). The lowest level of
congruence exists when individuals are in work environments that are opposite to
their personality types on the hexagonal model (e.g., a social type in a realistic work
environment). The primary goal of career counseling is helping clients identify and
connect with congruent work environments.

Realistic Investigative

Conventional Artistic
Enterprising
Degree of Consistency Personality Patterns
remem Hi6)h RI, RC, IR, IA, Al, AS,
SA, SE, ES, EC, CE
Medium RA, RE, IS, IC, AR, AE,
SI, SC, EA, ER, CS, Ci
Low RS, IE, AC, SR, El, CA
Figure 2.1

The relationships among Holland types.
Source: Information from Holland’s Hexagon, ACT Research Report No. 29, by J. L. Holland, D. R.
Whitney, N. S. Cole, and J. M. Richards, Jr., 1969, Iowa City: The American College Testing Program.
Copyright © 1969 The American College Testing Program. Reprinted by permission.


--- chapter2/33.jpg ---

74

CHapter 2

Differentiation

To describe people and their work environments, Holland focuses on the three types
the person or environment most closely resembles. However, some people and en-
vironments are more clearly defined, or differentiated, than others. For example, a
person may more predominantly resemble one Holland type and have little resem-
blance to other types (a high level of differentiation), or a single type may dominate
an environment. Other persons or environments may resemble multiple types equally
and therefore be relatively undifferentiated or poorly defined. Holland referred to
the degree of distinctness among types representing a person’s personality profile as
“differentiation.” Because people who are undifferentiated can have difficulty mak-
ing career decisions, career interventions are often directed toward helping clients
achieve greater differentiation among Holland types.

Consistency

The degree of relatedness within types is referred to as consistency. The hexagonal
model is useful in illustrating the similarities across types. For example, types located
next to each other on the hexagon (e.g,, realistic and investigative) have more in com-
mon than types that are farther apart (e.g., realistic and social). Higher degrees of
consistency within personality types suggest more integration or harmony regarding
traits, interests, values, and perceptions than lower degrees of consistency. Holland
assumes that consistent persons are more predictable in their behavior and more
likely to be higher achievers in their careers than persons who are not consistent. It is
important to note, however, that it is not a goal of career counseling to make clients
more consistent. Rather, the primary use of consistency in career counseling relates
to client awareness. Specifically, it is important for clients with low consistency (e.g.,
a realistic-social personality type) to be aware of the fact that it may be difficult for
them to find an occupational environment that will allow them to express the diverse
aspects of their personalities. In such cases it is often necessary for clients to identify
avocational activities that provide opportunities for expressing personality types that
are not expressed in work. For example, a realistic-social personality type working
as a social worker may choose to spend her leisure time in woodworking activities.

Vocational Identity

Vocational identity is defined as the “possession of a clear and stable picture of one’s
goals, interests, and talent” (Holland, 1985a, p. 5). Vocational identity is an impor-
tant goal of many career development interventions and is dependent upon acquiring
sufficient occupational and self-information.

Applying Holland’s Theory

Congruence, differentiation, consistency, and vocational identity are the key theoret-
ical constructs used to link Holland’s theory to practice. “All things being equal, an
individual with high identity who is congruent, consistent, and differentiated should
be more predictable and better adjusted than one who is incongruent, inconsistent,


--- chapter2/34.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND ApatyiNG THEORtes oF Career DevetormeNT = 75

and undifferentiated” (Spokane et al., 2002, p. 385). Assessment instruments devel-
oped by Holland and his associates are typically used co measure these constructs,
and the results from these measures provide the stimuli for career counseling content.

For example, the Self-Directed Search (SDS) (Holland, 1994) and the Vocational
Preference Inventory (VPI) (Holland, 1985b) are used to translate individuals’ self-
estimates of interests and competencies into Holland types. The SDS consists of an
assessment booklet (used to identify the individual’s Holland type), an Occupations
Finder (two versions are available, each contain a listing of 1,334 occupations clas-
sified according to either three-letter Holland codes or presented in alphabetical
order), and an interpretive guide titled You and Your Career. The latter provides
individuals with additional information, activities, and readings related to using
Holland’s theory in career decision making. The SDS, which is the most widely used
interest inventory, is available in different versions based on reading level (SDS Form E),
setting (SDS CP, Corporate Version), and language spoken,

The SDS provides a useful starting point and straightforward approach for
focusing Juanita’s career exploration and information gathering. First, Juanita can
use the assessment booklet to identify her three-letter summary code. (Because re-
searchers have found a high error rate in sammary code calculations {e.g., Miller,
1997], it is important that counselors take precautions to minimize such errors.)
Then Juanita and the career counselor can review her summary code (“ASI” with low
differentiation) to explore how her abilities and interests relate to the characteristics
of the types her summary code comprises.

It is especially important to discuss with the client his or her summary code when
the code lacks consistency. A client with a code of RSA, for example, may have diffi-
culty finding occupations that resemble this code exactly (few jobs require workers to
have strong mechanical abilities and strong social skills). Clients who do not under-
stand this fact can experience a sort of “pendulum shifting” in their career choices.
That is, a person may opt for a realistic, or R, occupation and find that, for a time,
it is satisfactory in that it offers the opportunity for engaging in R tasks and rewards
R competencies. Over time, however, the person may begin noticing the absence of
social, or $, opportunities in his or her R work. The absence of $ opportunities may
lead to a growing sense that the R occupation needs to be replaced with one in the S
environment. If this occupational change occurs, it may provide satisfaction initially,
but, over time, the person may feel that the occupation is too S and not enough R
and the pendulum may shift back toward desiring an R occupation.

Helping the client who is low in consistency to become aware of the possible
“pendulum shifting” that can occur in occupational decision making is important
because, if a congruent occupational environment is not possible, appropriate avo-
cational activities may provide the solution (rather than an ongoing shifting from
occupations in one Holland environment to another), In these instances, counselors
may use the Leisure Activities Finder (Holmberg, Rosen, & Holland, 1990) to help
clients identify opportunities to express important dimensions of their personali-
ties that they may not be able to express in work. For example, the person with an
RSA code may choose to emphasize working with things (R} at work (perhaps as a
cook), but spend leisure time in activities emphasizing the social (S) theme (e.g., as
youth group leader for a church). As noted, it is important for career counselors to


--- chapter2/35.jpg ---

76 = Cuapter 2

understand that consistency is not a goal of career counseling. Rather, consistency is
aconstruct that helps clients understand who they are and then use this understand-
ing to make effective career decisions.

Clients with codes that lack differentiation (determined by comparing either the
client’s highest score minus the lowest score among the six types or by examining
the numerical difference among the client’s three-letter code) often experience a lack
of focus in their career direction for a number of reasons. Persons may lack differ-
entiation because: (a) they lack exposure to activities across Holland environments,
(b) they have difficulty in decision making, (c) they have multipotentiality, or
(d) they are depressed.

Clients lacking in exposure to Holland environments (e.g., young people with
little or no work experience, homemakers returning to the labor market after an
extended departure) may need help increasing their self-understanding related to
interests, abilities, and values. In such instances, counselors may use activities such
as values inventories, values card sorts, or skills checklists to foster client understand-
ing of these career decision-making variables. Those persons returning to the labor
market after an extended departure may find it particularly useful to engage in an
“accomplishments exercise” in which the counselor invites the client to list activi-
ties, or accomplishments, about which the client feels especially proud. As the client
describes the activity, the counselor encourages the client to list the skills embedded
in the successful performance of the activity. After engaging in this discussion for
several activities, the counselor and client will have generated a long list of skills the
client demonstrated in the successful completion of each activity he or she described.
These skills can then be categorized according to Holland type and the counselor and
client can review the skills they enjoy using most to identify the Holland type that
reflects the client’s dominant type. Undifferentiated clients with limited work experi-
ences may also need to take steps such as information interviewing, volunteering, and
job shadowing to increase their self-understanding and become more differentiated.

Clients with decision-making difficulties can be taught decision-making skills
and then encouraged to retake the SDS and/or to discuss their perceptions as to
which Holland types they most closely resemble. As an alternative to retaking the
SDS in these instances, the client can engage in a Holland card sort activity in which
the client sorts through activities according to the degree to which he or she likes,
dislikes, or feels neutral toward each activity. Each group of cards can then be re-
viewed in light of the Holland types they reflect. During this activity, the counselor
can observe how difficult it is for the client to make decisions. After having been
taught decision-making skills and after engaging in self-assessment activities and
reviewing occupational information, some clients may remain undecided. Indecisive
clients may have concerns that result in a “fear of deciding.” Clients may be fearful
of making choices for a variety of factors. For example, a client may have excessive
fears related to failing, succeeding, or disappointing significant others. In these in-
stances, the counselor and client will need to engage in a counseling or therapy-like
process to help the client understand his or her fears.

Scores on the SDS that are elevated and undifferentiated may also reflect the fact
that, rather than being indecisive or lacking experience, the client is multipotentialed
in interests and competencies. This is, in fact, the case for Holland himself, who


--- chapter2/36.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND ApplyinG THEORIES OF Career Deveiorment — 77

has elevated and undifferentiated scores across almost all Holland types (Weinrach,
1996)! For clients with elevated and undifferentiated SDS scores, the counselor
may find it useful to focus on the client’s values as a guide for making occupational
decisions. Finally, counselors also need to determine whether clients with low
scores for all Holland types are having difficulty with depression or low self-esteem.
Given Juanita’s difficulties in school and her young age, all of the aforementioned
possibilities should be explored in relationship to the low differentiation in her
summary code.

With a general understanding of the Holland typology and a specific understand-
ing of their own Holland summary codes, clients are ready to examine the Occupa-
tions Finder to locate occupations that resemble their summary codes. Each client
focuses on occupations resembling all combinations of his or her summary code (e.g.,
Juanita would explore occupations in the categories of ASI, SIA, AIS, SAI, IAS, and
ISA). Clients then identify specific occupations within these categories that are of
interest to them.

Next, counselors encourage clients to take some sort of action (e.g., information
interviewing, reading about occupational requirements, job shadowing) to increase
their understanding of occupations of interest. Clients can then discuss with their
counselors the information they acquire from these activities and narrow their list
of occupational options. In these discussions, counselors encourage clients to take
additional steps (e.g., volunteering, taking courses related to a particular occupation,
job searching) toward implementing tentative occupational choices. In discussing the
information the client obtains, the counselor and client also review how each specific
option provides opportunities for expressing the types comprising the client’s sum-
mary code. The overarching goals in this process are to clarify the client’s vocational
identity and help the client make a congruent career decision.

In addition to the SDS, counselors can use the VPI in helping clients identify their
Holland type and connect their summary codes to congruent occupational environ-
ments. The VPI (1985b) contains 160 occupational titles, the six type scales, and
five supplemental scales (self-control, masculinity, status, infrequency, and acquies-
cence). To assess vocational identity, counselors can use the instrument entitled My
Vocational Situation (MVS) (Holland, Gottfredson, & Power, 1980}. Specifically,
the MVS measures vocational identity and perceived career development barriers.
‘The Vocational Identity scale measures awareness of and the ability to specify one’s
interests, personality characteristics, strengths, and goals as they relate to career
choices. The Occupational Information (OI) scale of the MVS measures the respon-
dent’s need for occupational information.

Gottfredson and Holland (1996) have also created an inventory (the Position
Classification Inventory [PCI]} for classifying specific work environments using the
Holland typology. Prior to the PCL, which uses the workers’ judgments to classify
the work environment, researchers and counselors relied on conducting an actual
census of workers to classify a specific work environment according to the Holland
types. Because variability exists across same-type occupations in different work
environments, the PCI may be particularly useful in helping clients understand
their degree of congruence in a specific job, Miller and Bass (2003) have found the
PCI to be useful in classifying work environments in a paper manufacturing plant.


--- chapter2/37.jpg ---

78

Cuarter 2

Other inventories also use the Holland typology in reporting assessment results.
For example, the Strong Interest Inventory (SII) (Harmon et al., 1994), the Career
Assessment Inventory (CAI) (Johannson, 1986), and the Armed Services Vocational
Aptitude Battery (ASVAB) (U.S. Department of Defense, 1993) each use Holland’s
types in reporting assessment results.

Evaluating Holland's Theory

Research emanating from Holland’s theory is extensive. In fact, it can be argued
that Holland’s theory has been subjected to more empirical tests than any other
career theory (Spokane & Cruza-Guet, 2005). Gottfredson and Richards (1999)
note that a major advantage of Holland’s theory is that ir provides a parallel way of
describing people and environments. In 1996, Holland summarized research findings
supporting the use of his typology to explain career certainty, career change, and
career satisfaction. From Holland’s review it is evident that his theory continues to
stimulate much research activity. Generally, this activity focuses on (a) the relations
between congruence and important career outcomes, (b) methods for calculating
constructs such as congruence, and (c) the application of Holland’s theory to diverse
populations.

Spokane et al. (2002) summarized the congruence-related research, noting that
although research results are somewhat mixed, there is a “modest relationship be-
tween person-environment fit and job satisfaction” (p. 400). Spokane, Fouad, and
Swanson (2001) argued that most of the congruence-related research, especially in
the early years, was correlational in nature and therefore does not reflect the com-
plexity inherent in person-environment interactions. Longitudinal, cross-sectional,
and experimental studies are needed to more accurately represent person-environment
interactions and to understand the validity of the congruence construct.

Though there are data to support the importance of congruence in vocational
satisfaction, research support for the relationship between consistency and differen-
tiation to vocational outcomes has been weak. Perhaps to an even greater degree than
what is true for the congruence research, research methodologies employed in these
studies have not been sufficiently sophisticated to examine the complex processes
related to consistency, differentiation, and relevant occupational outcomes (e.g.,
satisfaction, stability).

Nonetheless, some interesting studies provide intriguing data related to the
validity of Holland’s theory. For example, Miller (2002) investigated the degree of
change in a male client’s three-letter Holland code over a 10-year time span. The
client initially took the SDS when he was 16 years old. The client’s Holland code
remained stable across the 10-year period, thus supporting Holland’s contention that
personality types measured by the SDS remain stable over time. Lent, Brown, Nota,
and Soresi (2003) examined the relationship of interest congruence to the occupa-
tional choices of 796 Italian high school students. Lent et al. found that interests were
significant predictors of occupational choices for all Holland types.

Oleski and Subich (1996) provided an example of the first type of research in
their investigation of adults in the process of changing careers. Studying 42 nontra-
ditional students (mean age 34.4) pursuing a career change, Oleski and Subich found


--- chapter2/38.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND Appin THEORIES oF Caxeée Deveiorment 79

support for Holland’s (1985a) basic assumption that people change careers to
achieve greater congruence.

Lent and Lopez (1996) investigated the relationship between congruence indi-
ces and job satisfaction among adult workers. Although they found partial overlap
among methods for calculating congruence in their study, Lent and Lopez noted the
need for more research to understand the relations among indices of congruence,
methods for coding work environments, and the antecedents to congruence.

Tracey (2008) found that for college students enrolled in a career development
class, the RIASEC model was related to better career decision-making outcomes
(students considering congruent career options have more career certainty and
career decision-making self-efficacy than those who do not adhere to the congru-
ence principle). In a study examining career persisters versus career changers,
Donahue (2006) found person-environment congruence to be related to career
stability. Perdue, Reardon, and Peterson (2007) also found person-environment
congruence to be associated with job satisfaction within a sample of 198 employees
working for a multinational communications corporation.

Of course, achieving congruence is, in part, dependent upon the availability of
occupations allowing for the expression of one’s personality. Downes and Kraeck
(1996) hypothesized that there is an overall discrepancy between normative occu-
pational interests and the number of existing positions in the United States. Using
normative interest data from the Self-Directed Search and data extracted from the
Monthly Labor Review, Downes and Kroeck found support for their hypothesis.
Specifically, they found a lack of interest for Conventional and Enterprising jobs
relative to the number of existing positions. They found the opposite with regard
to the remaining Holland categories. For instance, there was excess interest among
high school students for Social, Artistic, and Investigative jobs relative to the number
of existing positions. Investigative and Realistic jobs represented high-interest areas
for the adults in the study. Based on their findings, Downes and Kroeck called for a
concerted effort to reshape the interests and skills of the U.S. labor force in order to
meet the labor needs of corporations and educational institutions.

Ryan, Tracey, and Rounds (1996) and Rounds and Tracey (1996) studied the
generalizability of Holland’s (1985a) model of vocational interests across ethnicity,
gender, and SES. Ryan, Tracey, and Rounds found similar interest structures in the
Caucasian and the African American high school students in their study. Ryan and
her colleagues also found no differences in the structure of interests between low- and
high-SES groups. A similar result was obtained when comparing low- and high-SES
Caucasian groups. However, the low-SES African American group was better fit by
Holland’s model than the high-SES African American group. Both male and female
students fit Holland’s model. Thus, Ryan and her colleagues concluded that Holland’s
modet is generalizable across ethnicity, gender, and socioeconomic status as defined in
their study. Oliver and Wachler (2005) found support for Holland’s typology and their
arrangement in circular RIASEC order within a sample of Native Hawaiians.

Mihalik (1996) examined whether clients’ types predicted reactions to counselor
intentions. Using a sample of undergraduate college students, Mihalik found that clients’
vocational interests as measured by the SDS (Holland, 1987) were predictive of client
reactions to counselor interventions. For example, participants with high Enterprising



--- chapter2/39.jpg ---

80

Carter 2

scores responded positively to feeling challenged in counseling and participants with
high Social scores responded positively to being supported by the counselor.

This very brief sample of research provides an indication of the fact that Holland’s
theory has generated more research than any other model of career choice. Much of
this research supports the theory (Holland, 1996; Spokane, 1985; Spokane et al.,
2002). Also, the theory provides a clear link to practice: “The combination of empirical
support and practical application accounts for the theory’s popularity among the pub-
lic as well as among professionals” (Spokane, 1996, p. 62). More studies investigating
the validity of Holland’s method across cultural contexts are needed.

JOHN KRUMBOLTZ’S LEARNING THEORY
OF CAREER COUNSELING

Krumboltz and his colleagues (especially Mitchell and Jones) developed a learning
theory of career counseling comprising two distinct parts. The first part focuses on
explaining the origins of career choice and is labeled as the “social learning theory of
career decision making” (SLTCDM) (Mitchell & Krumboltz, 1996). The second part
focuses on career counseling and is labeled the “learning theory of career counseling”
(LTCC) (Krumboltz & Henderson, 2002; Mitchell & Krumboltz, 1996), Because
the SLTCDM identifies the factors influencing the career decisions people make
{and is, therefore, subsumed. under the LTCC part of the theory) and because the
LTCC explains what career counselors can do to help clients make effective career
decisions, Mitchell and Krumbolrz labeled the entire theory as the LTCC.

LTCC is based on the application of Bandura’s (1977, 1986) social learning
theory to career decision making. Bandura’s theory emphasizes the influence of
reinforcement theory, cognitive information processing, and classical behaviorism
on human behavior. Social learning theory “assumes that people’s personalities
and behavioral repertoires can be explained most usefully on the basis of their
unique learning experiences while still acknowledging the role played by innate and
developmental processes” (Mitchell & Krumboltz, 1996, p. 234). Social learning
theory also assumes that “humans are intelligent, problem-solving individuals who
strive at all times to understand the reinforcement that surrounds them and who in
turn control their environments to suit their own purposes and needs” (Mitchell &
Krumboltz, 1984, p. 236). Bandura (1986) described the interaction of environ-
ment, self-referent thought, and behavior as the “triadic reciprocal interaction
system.”

Krumboltz and his colleagues drew upon these theoretical assumptions in devel-
oping LTCC. As noted earlier, SLTCDM describes the factors influencing individu-
als’ career decisions and LTCC describes what career counselors can do to help their
clients make effective career choices.

SLTCDM

The SLTCDM identifies four factors that influence our career decision making:
1, Genetic endowment and special abilities. Genetic endowments are inher-
ited qualities, such as sex, race, and physical appearance. Special abilities such as


--- chapter2/40.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND Apptvine THEoes OF Cares Development 81

intelligence, athletic ability, and musical and artistic talents resule from the interac-
tion of genetic factors and exposure to selected environmental events.

2, Environmental conditions and events. Factors in this category are generally
outside our control and can involve a wide variety of cultural, social, political, and
economic forces. For example, government-sponsored job-training programs, such
as the Comprehensive Employment Training Act and the Job Training Partmership
Act, can provide opportunities for learning new skills and increasing employability.
Technological developments (e.g., computer technologies) create new job opportuni-
ties and make others obsolete. Legislation related to welfare, labor laws, and union
policies influences job availability and facilitates or restricts job entry. Natural disas-
ters can dramatically influence career opportunities and career paths. Family tradi-
tions, as well as neighborhood and community resources, can also significantly affect
individuals’ career decision making. Job entry requirements can persuade or deter us
from considering specific occupational opportunities. Our geographical location can
also play a prominent feature in influencing our career choices and the availability
of job opportunities (e.g., climatic differences between Maine and Florida result in
differences in the availability of some job opportunities; the availability of counsel-
ing jobs is greater in the United States than in other countries in which counseling
concerns are resolved by spiritual leaders).

3, Instrumental and associative learning experiences. Instrumental learning ex-
periences involve antecedents, behaviors, and consequences. According to Mitchell
and Krumboitz (1996):

Antecedents include the genetic endowments, special abilities, and environmental condi-
tions and events previously discussed as well as the characteristics of a particular task or
problem. Behavioral responses include cognitive and emotional responses as well as overt
behavior. Consequences include immediate and delayed effects produced by the behavior
as well as “self-talk” about those consequences. (p. 238)

To illustrate, consider Jennifer, a master’s degree student in counselor educa-
tion. She is very competent interpersonally (genetic endowment, special abilities,
and skills) but feels anxious about enrolling in the required research course. Statis-
tics and research design especially intimidate her. Because the research course is a
program requirement, she must take this course (planned environmental condition).
The professor in this course, however, is well acquainted with counselor education
students and knows that many feel anxious about the program requirement in re-
search, Hence, in teaching the course the professor works hard at praising students
for their successes and supporting them when they struggle with course content. In
this situation, Jennifer decides to apply herself and work as hard as she can to mas-
ter the course content (covert and overt action). On her first exam, Jennifer earns a
B grade—far better than she ever had imagined (consequences). As a result, she be-
gins to think that, rather than being frightening, research is fun and that she might
be able to become a competent researcher (covert reactions to consequences). As
the semester goes on, Jennifer begins to tutor her peers who are struggling with this
course. In her second year, she serves as a graduate assistant in the research course
and enjoys helping students who feel anxious about being able to succeed in the
course (impact on significant others).


--- chapter2/41.jpg ---

82

CHAPTER 2

Associative learning experiences occur when a neutral stimulus is paired with
a positive and/or negative stimulus or consequences. For example, Juanita’s school
counselor encourages her to attend a job fair at her high school because Juanita is
undecided about her career options. Juanita agrees to attend the fair. She has no real
career options in mind but decides she will “browse” to see what options seem in-
teresting. At the job fair, Juanita encounters a news anchor, who also happens to be
Latina, for the local television station. Juanita had never given much thought to jobs
in TV journalism (neutral stimulus), but thoroughly enjoys her meeting with the local
anchor (positive stimulus). Juanita is even invited to take a tour of the studio and
sit in ona live broadcast. After taking the tour and observing the broadcast, Juanita
decides to enroll in a formal externship program the high school has established with
the television station (positive consequences).

4, Task-approach skills, Juanita will need to use many skills in determining
whether journalism is a good career choice for her. For example, she will need to
be able to clarify her interests, values, and skills; gather occupational information;
and know how to integrate this information in her decision making. In this process,
Juanita will need to consider her genetic characteristics, special abilities, and environ-
mental influences (e.g., family support, training opportunities, financial resources,
and occupational opportunities), These behaviors are examples of task-approach
skills that Juanita must use in making a career choice. Task-approach skills also
include the individual’s work habits, mental set, emotional responses, cognitive pro-
cesses, and problem-solving skills. Additionally, if Juanita decides to pursue a career
as a television journalist, she will need to develop a wide range of journalistic skills
in order to achieve her goal. Thus, task-approach skills influence outcomes and are
themselves outcomes,

These four factors influence our beliefs about ourselves (e.g., what we are good
at, what our interests are, what we value) and ouc beliefs about the world (e.g., “hard
work always pays off,” “all accountants are stuffy,” “all counselors value altruism
over economic rewards”). Although the interactions of these four factors influence
people differently, there are generally four ways in which they can influence our
career decision making.

1. Self-observation generalizations. Overt or covert statements evaluating our
actual or vicarious performance or self-assessments of our interests and values are
defined as self-observation generalizations (Mitchell & Krumboltz, 1996, p. 244).
Learning experiences lead us to draw conclusions about ourselves. We compare
our performance with the performance of others and to our own performance ex-
pectations, We use these comparisons to draw conclusions about our performance
capabilities. Conclusions about our interests and values also result from learning
experiences. In SLTCDM, interests link learning experiences with specific actions (as
when doing well in a research course leads to the decision to participate in research
projects and teach others about research). Self-observations about values are, in es
sence, statements about the desirability of specific outcomes, behaviors, or events
(Mitchell & Krumboltz, 1996). For example, the statement that “it is important
that my job provides ample time for me to be with my family” is a values-related.
self-observation generalization about desirable outcomes resulting from previous
learning experiences.


--- chapter2/42.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND ApplyInG THEORIES OF Cares Devetorvent 83

2. Worldview generalizations. Likewise, generalizations about the nature and
functioning of the world (e.g., “It’s not what you know, it’s who you know,” “It is
better to try and fail than to not try at all”) are formed from learning experiences.
The accuracy of worldview generalizations is dependent on the learning experiences
shaping such generalizations.

3. Task-approach skills. Mitchell and Krumboltz (1996) define these out-
comes as “cognitive and performance abilities and emotional predispositions
for coping with the environment, interpreting it in relation to self-observation
generalizations, and making covert and overt predictions about future events”
(p. 246), As noted earlier, task-approach skills influence career decision making
and are outcomes of learning experiences that shape individuals’ career devel-
opment, Task-approach skills critical to career development are those involved
in decision making, problem solving, goal setting, information gathering, and
values clarifying.

4. Actions. Learning experiences eventually fead individuals to take actions
related to entering a career. These actions can include applying for a job, entering a
training program, applying to college, changing jobs, or taking other overt steps to
make progress in one’s career.

The SLTCDM suggests that career decision making is “influenced by complex
environmental (e.g., economic) factors, many of which are beyond the control of any
single individual” (Krumboitz, Mitchell, & Gelatt, 1976, p. 75). The theory also un-
derscores “the interaction between innate predispositions and learning experiences
within the intra-individual, family, social, educational and cultural context” (Krumboltz
& Henderson, 2002, p. 43). Also, based on SLTCDM, Krumboltz (1994) noted that
people will prefer an occupation if:

1. They have succeeded at tasks they believe are like tasks performed by members
of that occupation.

2, They have observed a valued model being reinforced for activities like those
performed by members of that occupation.

3. A valued friend or relative stressed its advantages to them and/or they observed
positive words and images being associated with it. (p. 19)

Conversely, Krumboltz noted that people will avoid an occupation if:

1, They have failed at tasks they believe are similar to tasks performed by people in
that occupation,

2. They have observed a valued model being punished or ignored for performing
activities like those performed by members of that occupation.

3. A valued friend or relative stressed its disadvantages to them and/or they have
observed negative words and images being associated with it. (p. 19)

The Learning Theory of Career Counseling

The strength of SLTCDM is that it provides a description of factors influencing
career decision making and identifies outcomes resulting from those influential fac-
tors. As such, it is a useful theory for understanding career paths retrospectively, The
understanding acquired from such a perspective is helpful in making current career
decisions and in formulating future career goals,


--- chapter2/43.jpg ---

84

Cxaprer 2

When career concerns arise, they typically involve one or more of the fallow-
ing: (a) the absence of a goal, or career indecision (Juanita’s presenting concern);
(b) expressed feeling of concern about high aspirations, or unrealism; and (c) a
conflict berween equally appropriate alternatives, or multipotentiality (Krumboltz &
Thoresen, 1969). Krumboltz developed the learning theory of career counseling
(LTCC) to guide counselors in constructing career development interventions to help
clients cope more effectively with these career concerns. Specifically, counselors us-
ing LTCC help clients to: (a) acquire more accurate self-observation generalizations,
(b} acquire more accurate worldview generalizations, (c) learn new task approach
skills, and (d) take appropriate career-related actions. LTCC assumes that counselors
must be prepared to help their clients cope with four current career-related trends
identified by Mitchell and Krumboltz (1996, pp. 250-252).

1, People need to expand their capabilities and interests, not base decisions on
existing characteristics only. Interest inventories assess what we know and what
we have experienced, To maximize a client’s career choice options, counselors
must encourage that client to explore new activities, develop new interests, and
consider new options based on newly formed interests and capabilities.

2. People need to prepare for changing work tasks, and not assume that occupa-
tions will remain stable. Because change is constant, career counselors must help
their clients identify new skills to learn and develop strategies for coping with the
stress inherent in an ever-changing world of work.

3. People need to be empowered to take action, not merely to be given a diagnosis,
For some clients, implementing a career choice is more challenging than making
the choice. Many clients need ongoing assistance from their career counselors as
they attempt to adjust to the career choice made and implemented,

4. Careet counselors need to play a major role in dealing with all career problems,
not just career selection. Career-related concerns exist beyond this concern of
identifying a career choice. Many clients struggle with the burnout, underem-
ployment, relationships with coworkers, family members’ reactions to career
choices, and low self-efficacy,

These four trends suggest the importance of providing clients with learning
experiences to (a) correct faulty assumptions, (b) learn new skills and interests,
(c) identify effective strategies for addressing issues emanating from interactions
between work and other life-role activities and concerns, and (d) learn skills for
coping with changing work tasks. Career counselors can use assessments to help
clients identify what characteristics (e.g., beliefs, skills, values, interests, personal-
ity) they have learned and to identify opportunities for learning new characteris-
tics. Thus, the task of the career counselor is to promote client learning and the goal
of career counseling is to enhance the ability of clients to create satisfying lives for
themselves (Krumboltz, 1996).

Applying LTCC

Krumboltz (1996) divides career development interventions into two categories:
(a) developmental/preventive and (b} targeted/remedial. The former includes career
education programs, school-to-work initiatives, job club programs, study materials,
and simulations. These career development interventions facilitate the acquisition


--- chapter2/44.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND ApPIYING THEORES OF Career DevesormentT = 85

of accurate and occupational self-information and the use of this information in the
career decision-making process. Learning through active on-the-job participation
(e.g., job shadowing, internships, and worksite observation) is emphasized. It is im-
portant to note that although many clients, such as Juanita, could certainly benefit
from participating in many of these activities, they must first receive more targeted
and remedial career development interventions.

Targeted and remedial career development interventions include goal clarifica-
tion, cognitive restructuring, cognitive rehearsal, narrative analysis, role playing,
desensitization, paradoxical intention, and humor (Krumboltz, 1996, pp. 66-72).
LTCC also emphasizes the importance of teaching decision-making skills to cli-
ents. Learning how to make career decisions helps clients to resolve current career
concerns and equips clients with an important task approach skill for coping with
changing work and personal conditions in the future (Krumboltz, 1976). For ex-
ample, once Juanita has clarified her goals and learns how to make good decisions,
she will then be ready to participate in more focused on-the-job activities (e.g., job
shadowing, volunteering).

To help counselors identify problematic client beliefs related to each of the career
problem categories (Le., indecision, unrealism, and multipotentiality), Krumboltz (1988)
developed the Career Beliefs Inventory (CBI). The CBI is based on the rationale that
people make career decisions according to what they believe about themselves and
the world-of-work. As Krumboltz wrote in 1994, “If their beliefs are accurate and
constructive, they will act in ways that are likely to help them achieve their goals.
If their beliefs are inaccurate and self-defeating, they will act in a way that makes
sense to them but may not help them achieve their goals” (p. 424). The CBI helps
counselors to understand their clients’ career beliefs and assumptions. Thus, the
instrument is most useful when administered at the beginning of career counseling.
The CBI contains 25 scales organized into the following five categories: My Current
Career Situation, What Seems Necessary for My Happiness, Factors That Influence
My Decisions, Changes I Am Willing to Make, and Efforts | Am Willing to Initiate.
These categories are related to mental barriers blocking clients from taking action.
As Krumboltz and Henderson (2002) remind us, meaningful journeys, including
our career journey, contain obstacles that must be confronted. Some clients allow
discouragement and other problematic beliefs to dominate their thinking and thwart
efforts to take positive actions. Self-defeating beliefs such as those measured by the
CBI must be addressed if the client is to move forward. Counseling strategies such
as cognitive restructuring and reframing are useful in helping the client to address
these issues.

Related to the notion of career beliefs is the fact that often in career counseling,
clients refer to significant events in ways that suggest the client had little to do with
the experience. For example, a client may say “I just got lucky” or “I just happened
to be in the right place at the right time.” Krumboltz and his associates (Mitchell,
Levin, & Krumboltz, 1999) recognize that career counseling often involves helping
clients understand and take advantage of the chance events they encounter in daily
living. In fact, they note that “unplanned events are not only inevitable, they are de-
sirable” (p. 118) and refer to this phenomenon as “planned happenstance.” Planned
happenstance can be incorporated into career counseling by teaching clients “to


--- chapter2/45.jpg ---

86

Craprer 2

generate, recognize, and incorporate chance events into the process of their career
development” (Krumboltz & Henderson, 2002, p. 49). Specifically, career counsel-
ors can ask their clients questions such as: “How have unplanned events influenced
your career in the past? How did you enable each event to influence your career de-
velopment? How do you feet about encountering unplanned events in your future?”
(2002, p. 50). Counselor and client interactions that intentionally address the role
of chance in career development help to normalize such occurrences, help clients see
their thematic influence upon their career development, and help clients be increas-
ingly open to noticing and acting upon unplanned events in the future. In essence,
an internal locus of control and increased sense of personal self-efficacy are fostered.

Mitchell et al. (1999) focus on the skills clients need to develop to take advantage
of unplanned events in their career development. They note that developing a sense
of curiosity, being persistent, being flexible, maintaining a sense of optimism, and
being willing to take risks represent a set of skills that increase the individual’s ability
to take advantage of unplanned events.

Evaluating Career Development Interventions

Typically, counselors evaluate the success of career development interventions by
standards determining whether clients experience a reduction in career indecision.
Krumboltz recommends that career counselors consider revising these criteria. For
example, counselors using LTCC view indecision as a desirable quality for moti-
vating clients to engage in new learning activities. Hence, Krumboltz recommends
reframing “indecision” to “open-mindedness.”

Krumboltz also suggests that the goal of achieving congruence between indi-
viduals and their work environments is unnecessarily restricting because “birds of
a feather” do not always flock together (i.e., there is intra-occupational variability
among people). Two very different people can be successful in the same occupation.
Krumboltz (1996) also argues that the congruence criterion is less useful today be-
cause it is based on stagnant definitions of occupational environments, thereby over-
looking changes in work environments: “Heterogeneity, not homogeneity, within
occupations is now more highly valued” (p. 73).

In place of these two traditional outcome criteria, Krumboltz recommends
focusing on measuring changes in client characteristics such as skills, values, beliefs,
interests, and work habits. Counselors can ask themselves whether their career devel-
opment interventions have stimulated their clients to engage in new learning activi-
ties. Process measures can focus on assessing the degree to which clients have made
efforts to create more satisfying lives (e.g., Have they engaged in career exploratory
or information-seeking behaviors?).

Evaluating LTCC

LICC is new and relatively untested by research. There is, however, extensive re-
search supporting the general social learning theory (Hackett et al., 1991). Addition-
ally, Krumboltz (1996) cites several studies supporting SLTCDM hypotheses related
to the development of educational and occupational preferences, task-approach
skills, and action.


--- chapter2/46.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND AprlyinG THzoRIes OF Career Development 87

A strength of LTCC is that it addresses both environmental and intra-individual

variables affecting career development. As such, LTCC is very compatible with
Super’s Archway model of career development, with LTCC offering a bit more in

terms of specific ways in which environmental and personal variables influence ca-
reer decision making. LTCC also can be used as a framework for understanding the
development of interests leading to one’s personal modal orientation as described by
Holland’s theory, Finally, the development of the CBI, and subsequent application
of strategies such as cognitive restructuring and reframing, provide useful and impor-
tant applications of the theory to career development interventions.

MyCounselingLab

‘Goto Topic 4: The Development of Career Be-
= havior arid Choice in the MyCounselingLab™

site (www.MyCounselingLab.com) for Career

Development Interventions in thé 21st Century,
Fourth Edition, where you can:

© \ Find learning outcomes’ for The: Devel-
--Opment of Career Bebavior and. Choice

along with the national, standards: that
“"-gofinect to these outcomes.

. Conmpioie Assignments and Activities:

that can help you more’ deeply. under-
«. stand the chapter content.

*- Apply and practice. your understanding
of the core’skills identified in the chapter
-with the Building Counseling Skills unit.

¢ © Prepare yourself for professional certifica--,
tion with a Practice for Certification quiz.:

* Connect to videos through the Video and
Resource Library. ee Pee

Summary

The theories discussed in this chapter form the
foundation for how the leading theorists and
practitioners have conceptualized the career
development process for more than 50 years.
There are ways in which these theories converge,
but there are many ways in which they do not.
They each contribute important perspectives for
conceptualizing how careers develop and how
career choices are made, Thus there is no one
theory that sufficiently addresses all possible fac-
tors influencing career development and all cli-
ent career concerns. This is not surprising given
the highly complex nature of career develop-
ment. However, these theories do provide a solid
foundation upon which to expand our thinking

about the career development process and career
development interventions. Particular areas ripe
for expansion include describing how careers de-
velop for a wider range of people. Most of the
early theories of career development were based
on the career experience of White males and may
lack applicability to women and members of di-
verse racial, ethnic, socioeconomic, and religious
groups. Another area ripe for theory expansion
is the process and content of career counseling.
Most early theories of career development em-
phasize the career development process rather
than career development interventions. More
treatment-outcome studies directed toward de-
termining which interventions are appropriate


--- chapter2/47.jpg ---

88 Cuarrer 2

for which clients with what career concerns are
needed.

Nonetheless, the theories discussed in this
chapter provide an important stimulus in the
evolutionary process of theory development. As
these theories continue to evolve and as new
theories emerge, it is hoped that theorists will

continue the process of providing fuller, more
detailed, and more comprehensive descriptions,

of the career development process that can x )
used to provide effective career development
interventions to a wide range of people. The
emerging theories discussed in the next chapter
provide evidence of such progress,

Student Activities

1. Review the Holland types. Which types are
you most like? How do your activities re-
flect these types?

2. Review Super’s career development tasks.
Which tasks are you most concerned with
at this point in your life? What resources
and support would help you to cope effec-
tively with those tasks?

3. Review Gottfredson’s theory. In what ways
has sex-role stereotyping impacted on your
career?

4. Consider the life role of a worker. What have
you leamed about this life role from your

parents/guardians? What have you learned
about this life role from your relatives? In
what ways has culture influenced your un-
derstanding of the life role of a worker?

5. Review the theory of John Krumboltz. Iden-
tify two worldview generalizations that
you hold. Identify three self-observations
{you might begin this by stating, “I’m the
kind of person who... .” and “One thing I
value is...” and “I’m really good at...”),

6. Reflect upon your early life experiences and
consider how well Anne Roe’s theory de-
scribes your career choices.

References

Anderson, W. P., & Niles, S$. G. (1995), Career and
personal concerns expressed by career counseling
clients. The Career Development Quarterly, 43,
240-245,

Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought
and action: A social-cognitive theory. Upper Sad-
dle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Betz, N. E., & Corning, A. F. (1993}. The insepara-
bility of “career” and “personal” counseling. The
Career Development Quarterly, 42, 137-148.

Blanchard, C. A., & Lichtenberg, J. W. (2003).
Compromise in career decision making: A test
of Gottfredson’s theory. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 62, 250-271.

Blustein, D. L. (1994). “Who am 1?” The question
of self and identity in career development. In
M. L. Savickas & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Convergence

in career development theories: Implications for
science and practice (pp. 139-154). Palo Alto,
CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

Blustein, D.L., Gill, N.J.K., Kenna, A. C., & Murphy,
K. A. (2006). The psychology of working. Career
Planning and Adult Development Journal, 21,
10-21,

Borgen, F. H, (1991), Megatrends and milestones in
vocational behavior: A 20-year counseling psy-
chology perspective. Journal of Vocational Behav-
ior, 39, 263-290.

Borodovsky, L., 8 Ponterotto, J. (1994). A family-
based approach to multicultural career de-
velopment. In P. Pedersen & J. Carey (Eds.),
Multicultural counseling in schools (pp. 195-206).
Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

Brown, D. (1996). Brown’s values-based, holistic
model of career and life-role choices and satis-
faction. In D. Brown, L. Brooks, & Associates


--- chapter2/48.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND APPLYING THEORIES OF Career Develorment 89

(Eds.}, Career choice and development (3rd ed.,
pp. 337-372}. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Brown, M. T., Lum, J. L., & Voyle, K. (1997). Roe
revisited: A call for the reappraisal of the theory
of personality development and career choice.
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 51, 283-294.

Buehler, C. (1933). Der menschliche lebenslauf als
psychologisches problem. Leipzig: Hirzel.

Cairo, P. C., Kritis, K. J., & Myers, R. M. (1996).
Career assessment and the Adult Career Con-
cerns Inventory, Journal of Career Assessment, 4,
189-204.

Cochran, D. B, Wang, E. W., Stevenson, S. J.,
Johnson, L. E., & Crews, C. (in press). Adolescent
occupational aspirations: Test of Gottfredson’s
Theory of Circumscription and Compromise. The
Career Development Quarterly.

Coltrane, $., & Adams, M. (1997). Work-family im-
agery and gender stereotypes: Television and the
reproduction of difference. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, $0, 323-347.

Donahue, R. (2006). Person-environment congruence
in relation to career change and career persistence.
journal of Vocational Behavior, 68, 304-515.

Downes, M., & Kroeck, K. G. (1996). Discrepancies
between existing jobs and individual interests: An
empirical investigation of Holland's model. Jour
nal of Vocational Bebavior, 48, 107-117.

Eagle, B. W., Miles; E. W., & Icenogle, M. L.
(1997), Interrole conflicts and the permeability
of work and family domains: Are there gender
differences? Journal of Vocational Behavior, 50,
168-184,

Ginzberg, E., Ginsburg, $. W., Axelrad, S., & Herma,
J. (1951). Occupational choice: An approach to a
general theory. New York: Columbia University
Press.

Gottfredson, L. S. (1981), Cireumscription and com-
promise: A developmental theory of occupational
aspirations. Journal of Counseling Psychology,
28, 545-379,

Gottfredson, L. S. (1996). A theory of circumscrip-
tion and compromise. In D. Brown, L. Brooks, &
Associates (Eds.), Career choice and development
(3rd ed., pp. 179-281). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Gottfredson, L. S$. (2002). Gottfredson’s theory of
circumscription, compromise, and self-creation.
In D. Brown & Associates (Eds.), Career choice
and development (4th ed., pp. 85-148). San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Gorttfredson, L. S. (2003). The challenge and promise
of cognitive career assessment. Journal of Career
Assessment, 11, 115-135,

Gottfredson, L. S. (2005). Applying Gottfredson’s
theory of circumscription and compromise in ca-
reer guidance and counseling. In $. D. Brown
& R. W. Lent (Eds.), Career development and
counseling: Putting theory and research to work
(pp. 71-100). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

Gottfredson, L. S., & Holland, J. L. (1996). Position
classification inventory. Odessa, FL: PAR.

Gottfredson, L. $., & Richards, J. M. (1999). The
meaning and measurement of environments in
Holland’s theory. Journal of Vocational Behav-
ior, 42, 200-211.

Hackett, G., Lent, R., & Greenhaus, J. (1991).
Advances in vocational theory and research: A
20-year retrospective. Journal of Vocational Be-
havior, 38, 3-38.

Hannah, J., & Kahn, S. (1989). The relationship of
socioeconomic status and gender to the occupa-
tional choices of Grade 12 students. Journal of
Vocational Bebavior, 34, 161-178.

Harmon, L. W., Hansen, J. C., Borgen, F. H., &
Hammer, A. L. (1994). Strong Interest Inventory
applications and technical guide. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.

Hartung, P. J., Vandiver, B. J., Leong, F. T. L., Pope,
M., Niles, S. G., & Farrow, B. (1998), Appraising
cultural identity in career development assessment
and counseling. The Career Development Quar-
terly, 46, 276-293,

Havighurst, R. J. (1951). Validity of the Chicago
Attitude Inventory as a measure of personal
adjustment in old age. Journal of Abnormal and
Social Psychology, 46, 24-29.

Havighurst, R. J. (1953). Human development and
education. New York: Longmans Green.

Helwig, A. A. (2001). A test of Gottfredson’s theory
using a ten-year longitudinal study. Journal of
Career Development, 28, 77-95.

Henderson, S., Hesketh, B., & Tuffin, A. (1988). A
test of Gottfredson’s theory of circumscription.
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 32, 37-48.

Herr, E. L., Cramer, $. H., 8 Niles, $. G. (2004).
Career guidance and counseling through the
lifespan: Systematic approaches (6th ed.). Boston:
Allyn & Bacon,

Hesketh, B., Elmslie, $., & Kaldor, W. (1990). Career
compromise: An alternative account to Gottfredson’s


--- chapter2/49.jpg ---

90 Cuarrer 2

theory. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 37,
49-56.

Holland, J. L. (1959). A theory of vocational choice.
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 6, 35-45.

Holland, J. L. (1966). The psychology of vocational
choice. Waltham, MA: Blaisdell.

Holland, J. L. (1973). Making vocational choices: A
theory of careers. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pren-
tice Hall,

Holland, J. L. (1985a). Making vocational choices:
A theory of vocational personalities and work
environments (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall.

Holland, J. L. (1985b). Vocational Preference Inven-
tory. Odessa, FL: PAR.

Holland, J. L. (1992), Making vocational choices (2nd
ed.). Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.

Holland, J. L. (1994), Separate but unequal is better.
In M. L, Savickas & R, W. Lent (Eds.), Conver-
gence in career development theories: Implica-
tions for science and practice (pp. 45-51). Palo
Alto, CA: CPP Books.

Holland, J. L. (1996). Integrating career theory and
practice: The current situation and some poten-
tial remedies. In M. L. Savickas & W. B. Walsh
{Eds.), Handbook of career counseling theory and
practice (pp. 1-12). Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black.

Holland, J. L. (1997). Current status of Holland’s
theory of careers: Another perspective. The Career
Development Quarterly, 36, 31-44.

Holland, J. L., Gottfredson, G., & Power, P. (1980).
Some diagnostic scales for research in decision-
making and personality: Identity, information,
and barriers. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 39, 1191-1200.

Holmberg, K., Rosen, D., & Holland, J. L. (1990).
Leisure activities finder. Odessa, FL: Psychologi-
cal Assessment Resources.

Jepsen, D. A. (1994). The thematic-extrapolation
method: Incorporating career patterns into career
counseling. The Career Development Quarterly,
43, 43-53,

Johannson, C. B. (1986). The Career Assessment
Inventory. Minneapolis, MN: NCS Assessments.

Kelly, G. A. (1955). The psychology of personal con-
structs. New York: Norton.

Krumboltz, J. D. (1976). A social learning theory of
career choice. Counseling Psychologist, 6, 71-80.

Krumboltz, J. D. (1988). Career beliefs inventory.
Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

Krumboltz, J. D. (1993). Integrating career and per-
sonal counseling. The Career Development Quar-
terly, 42, 143-148.

Krumbolrz, J. D. (1994). The Career Beliefs Inven-
tory. Journal of Counseling and Development,
72, 424-428,

Krumboitz, J. D. (1996). A learning theory of career
counseling. In M. Savickas & B. Walsh (Eds.),
Integrating career theory and practice (pp. 233-
280). Palo Alto, CA: CPP Books.

Krumboltz, J.D., & Henderson, S. J. (2002). A learn-
ing theory for career counselors. In S. Niles (Ed.),
Adult career development: Concepts, issues, and
practices (pp. 3956). Tulsa, OK: National Career
Development Association.

Krumboltz, J. D., Mitchell, A., & Gelatt, H. G.
(1976). Applications of social learning theory of
career selection. Focus on Guidance, 8, 1-16.

Krumboltz, J. D., & Thoresen, C. E, (1969). Be-
havioral counseling: Cases and techniques. New
York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

Lent, E. B., & Lopez, F, G. (1996). Congruence from
many angles: Relations of multiple congruence
indices to job satisfaction among adult workers,
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 49, 24~37.

Lent, R. W. (2005). A social cognitive view of career
development and counseling, In 5, D. Brown & R. W.
Lent (Eds.}, Career development and counselin;
Putting theory and research to work (pp. 101-130),
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

Lent, R. W., Brown, $. D., Nota, L., 8 Soresi, S.
(2003). Testing social cognitive interest and
choice hypotheses across Holland types in Ital-
ian high school students. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 62, 101-118.

Leong, S. A., & Plake, T. 8. (1990). A choice dilemma
approach for examining the relative importance of
sex type and prestige preferences in the process of
career choice compromise. Journal of Counseling
Psychology, 37, 399-406.

Lewis, D. M., Savickas, M. L., 8 Jones, B. J. (1996).
Career development predicts medical school
success. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 49,
86-98.

Loscocco, K. A. (1997). Reactions to blue-collar
work: A comparison of men and women. Work
and Occupations, 17, 152-177.

Lucas, M. S. (1993). A validation of types of ca-
reer indecision at a counseling center, Journal of
Counseling Psychology, 40, 440-446.



--- chapter2/50.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND AppivinG THEORIES OF Career DeviorMenT = 97

Maslow, A. H. (1954). Motivation and personality.
New York: Harper & Row.

McLennan, N. A., & Arthur, N. (1999). Applying
the cognitive information processing approach to
career problem solving and decision making to
women’s career development. Journal of Employ-
ment Counseling, 36, 82-96.

Mihalik, J. R. (1996). Client vocational interests as
predictors of client reactions to counselor inten-
tions. Journal of Counseling and Development,
74, 416-421,

Miller, D. C., & Form, W. H. (1951). Industrial so-
ciology, New York: Harper & Row.

Miller, M. J. (1997). Error rates on two forms on
the Sclf-Directed Search and satisfaction with
results. Journal of Employment Counseling, 34,
98-103,

Miller, M. J. (2002). A longitudinal examination of a
three-letter Holland code. Journal of Employment
Counseling, 39, 43-48,

Miller, M. J., 8& Bass, C. (2003). Application of
Holland’s theory to a nonprofessional occupation.
Journal of Employment Counseling, 40, 17-23.

Mitchell, L. K., & Krumboltz, J. D. (1984). Social learn-
ing approach to career decision making: Krumboltz’s
theory. In D. Brown, L. Brooks, & Associates (Eds.),
Career choice and development: Applying contem-
porary theories to practice (2nd ed., pp. 235-280).
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Mitchell, L. K., & Krumboltz, J. D. (1996). Krumboltz’s
theory of career choice and counseling, In
D. Brown, L, Brooks, & Associates (Eds.), Career
choice development (3rd ed., pp. 233-280). San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Mitchell, A., Levin, A., & Krumboltz, J. D. (1999).
Planned happenstance: Constructing unexpected
career opportunities. journal of Counseling and
Development, 77, 115-124.

Murray, H. (1938). Explorations in personality.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Nevill, D. D., & Calvert, P. D. (1996). Career as-
sessment and the Salience Inventory. Journal of
Career Assessment, 4, 399-412.

Nevill, D. D., & Kruse, S. J, (1996). Career assess-
ment and the Values Scale. Journal of Career As-
sessment, 4, 383-397.

Nevill, D. D., & Super, D. E. (1986). The Values
Scale: Theory, application, and research manual
(research ed.). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psy-
chologists Press.

Niles, S. G., & Anderson, W. P. (1993). Career de-
velopment and adjustment: The relation between
concerns and stress, Journal of Employment
Counseling, 30, 79-87.

Niles, $. G., Anderson, W. P., & Goodnough, G.
(1998). Exploration to foster career development.
The Career Development Quarterly, 46, 262-275.

Niles, S. G., & Goodnough, G. E. (1996). Life-
role salience and values: A review of recent re-
search. The Career Development Quarterly, 45,
65-86.

Oleski, D., & Subich, L. M. (1996}. Congruence
and career change in employed adults. Journal of
Vocational Behavior, 49, 221-229.

Oliver, K. E., & Waehler, C. A. (2005). Investigating
the validity of Holland’s (1959, 1997) RIASEC
typology among Native Hawaiians. Journal of
Counseling Psychology, 52, 448-452.

Osipow, S. H., & Fitzgerald, L. F. (1996). Theories
of career development (4th ed.). Needham, MA:
Allyn & Bacon.

Parasuraman, S., Purhoit, Y. $., Godshalk, V. M., &
Beutell, N. J. (1996). Work and family variables,
entrepreneurial career success, and psychological
well-being. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 48,
275-300.

Perdue, S., Reardon, R., & Peterson, G. (2007).
Person-environment congruence, _ self-efficacy,
and environmental identity in relation to job sat-
isfaction.: A career decision theory perspective.
Journal of Employment Counseling, 44, 29-39.

Perrone, K. M. (2005). Work-family interface for
same sex, dual-earner couples: Implications for
counselors. The Career Development Quarterly,
53, 317-324,

Phillips, $. D. (1982). Career exploration in adult-
hood, Journal of Vocational Behavior, 20,
129-140.

Richardson, M. S. (1993). Work in people’s lives:
A location for counseling psychologists. Journal
of Counseling Psychology, 40, 425-433.

Roe, A. (1956), The psychology of occupations. New
York: Wiley.

Roe, A. (1957). Eazly determinants of vocational choice.
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 4, 212-217.

Rogers, C. R. (1951}. Client-centered therapy, its
current practice, implications, and theory. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.

Rounds, J., & Tracey, T. J. G, (1996). Cross-cultural
structural equivalence of RIASEC models and


