lic as well as among professionals” (Spokane, 1996, p. 62). More studies investigating
the validity of Holland’s method across cultural contexts are needed.

JOHN KRUMBOLTZ’S LEARNING THEORY
OF CAREER COUNSELING

Krumboltz and his colleagues (especially Mitchell and Jones) developed a learning
theory of career counseling comprising two distinct parts. The first part focuses on
explaining the origins of career choice and is labeled as the “social learning theory of
career decision making” (SLTCDM) (Mitchell & Krumboltz, 1996). The second part
focuses on career counseling and is labeled the “learning theory of career counseling”
(LTCC) (Krumboltz & Henderson, 2002; Mitchell & Krumboltz, 1996), Because
the SLTCDM identifies the factors influencing the career decisions people make
{and is, therefore, subsumed. under the LTCC part of the theory) and because the
LTCC explains what career counselors can do to help clients make effective career
decisions, Mitchell and Krumbolrz labeled the entire theory as the LTCC.

LTCC is based on the application of Bandura’s (1977, 1986) social learning
theory to career decision making. Bandura’s theory emphasizes the influence of
reinforcement theory, cognitive information processing, and classical behaviorism
on human behavior. Social learning theory “assumes that people’s personalities
and behavioral repertoires can be explained most usefully on the basis of their
unique learning experiences while still acknowledging the role played by innate and
developmental processes” (Mitchell & Krumboltz, 1996, p. 234). Social learning
theory also assumes that “humans are intelligent, problem-solving individuals who
strive at all times to understand the reinforcement that surrounds them and who in
turn control their environments to suit their own purposes and needs” (Mitchell &
Krumboltz, 1984, p. 236). Bandura (1986) described the interaction of environ-
ment, self-referent thought, and behavior as the “triadic reciprocal interaction
system.”

Krumboltz and his colleagues drew upon these theoretical assumptions in devel-
oping LTCC. As noted earlier, SLTCDM describes the factors influencing individu-
als’ career decisions and LTCC describes what career counselors can do to help their
clients make effective career choices.

SLTCDM

The SLTCDM identifies four factors that influence our career decision making:
1, Genetic endowment and special abilities. Genetic endowments are inher-
ited qualities, such as sex, race, and physical appearance. Special abilities such as


--- chapter2/40.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND Apptvine THEoes OF Cares Development 81

intelligence, athletic ability, and musical and artistic talents resule from the interac-
tion of genetic factors and exposure to selected environmental events.

2, Environmental conditions and events. Factors in this category are generally
outside our control and can involve a wide variety of cultural, social, political, and
economic forces. For example, government-sponsored job-training programs, such
as the Comprehensive Employment Training Act and the Job Training Partmership
Act, can provide opportunities for learning new skills and increasing employability.
Technological developments (e.g., computer technologies) create new job opportuni-
ties and make others obsolete. Legislation related to welfare, labor laws, and union
policies influences job availability and facilitates or restricts job entry. Natural disas-
ters can dramatically influence career opportunities and career paths. Family tradi-
tions, as well as neighborhood and community resources, can also significantly affect
individuals’ career decision making. Job entry requirements can persuade or deter us
from considering specific occupational opportunities. Our geographical location can
also play a prominent feature in influencing our career choices and the availability
of job opportunities (e.g., climatic differences between Maine and Florida result in
differences in the availability of some job opportunities; the availability of counsel-
ing jobs is greater in the United States than in other countries in which counseling
concerns are resolved by spiritual leaders).

3, Instrumental and associative learning experiences. Instrumental learning ex-
periences involve antecedents, behaviors, and consequences. According to Mitchell
and Krumboitz (1996):

Antecedents include the genetic endowments, special abilities, and environmental condi-
tions and events previously discussed as well as the characteristics of a particular task or
problem. Behavioral responses include cognitive and emotional responses as well as overt
behavior. Consequences include immediate and delayed effects produced by the behavior
as well as “self-talk” about those consequences. (p. 238)

To illustrate, consider Jennifer, a master’s degree student in counselor educa-
tion. She is very competent interpersonally (genetic endowment, special abilities,
and skills) but feels anxious about enrolling in the required research course. Statis-
tics and research design especially intimidate her. Because the research course is a
program requirement, she must take this course (planned environmental condition).
The professor in this course, however, is well acquainted with counselor education
students and knows that many feel anxious about the program requirement in re-
search, Hence, in teaching the course the professor works hard at praising students
for their successes and supporting them when they struggle with course content. In
this situation, Jennifer decides to apply herself and work as hard as she can to mas-
ter the course content (covert and overt action). On her first exam, Jennifer earns a
B grade—far better than she ever had imagined (consequences). As a result, she be-
gins to think that, rather than being frightening, research is fun and that she might
be able to become a competent researcher (covert reactions to consequences). As
the semester goes on, Jennifer begins to tutor her peers who are struggling with this
course. In her second year, she serves as a graduate assistant in the research course
and enjoys helping students who feel anxious about being able to succeed in the
course (impact on significant others).


--- chapter2/41.jpg ---

82

CHAPTER 2

Associative learning experiences occur when a neutral stimulus is paired with
a positive and/or negative stimulus or consequences. For example, Juanita’s school
counselor encourages her to attend a job fair at her high school because Juanita is
undecided about her career options. Juanita agrees to attend the fair. She has no real
career options in mind but decides she will “browse” to see what options seem in-
teresting. At the job fair, Juanita encounters a news anchor, who also happens to be
Latina, for the local television station. Juanita had never given much thought to jobs
in TV journalism (neutral stimulus), but thoroughly enjoys her meeting with the local
anchor (positive stimulus). Juanita is even invited to take a tour of the studio and
sit in ona live broadcast. After taking the tour and observing the broadcast, Juanita
decides to enroll in a formal externship program the high school has established with
the television station (positive consequences).

4, Task-approach skills, Juanita will need to use many skills in determining
whether journalism is a good career choice for her. For example, she will need to
be able to clarify her interests, values, and skills; gather occupational information;
and know how to integrate this information in her decision making. In this process,
Juanita will need to consider her genetic characteristics, special abilities, and environ-
mental influences (e.g., family support, training opportunities, financial resources,
and occupational opportunities), These behaviors are examples of task-approach
skills that Juanita must use in making a career choice. Task-approach skills also
include the individual’s work habits, mental set, emotional responses, cognitive pro-
cesses, and problem-solving skills. Additionally, if Juanita decides to pursue a career
as a television journalist, she will need to develop a wide range of journalistic skills
in order to achieve her goal. Thus, task-approach skills influence outcomes and are
themselves outcomes,

These four factors influence our beliefs about ourselves (e.g., what we are good
at, what our interests are, what we value) and ouc beliefs about the world (e.g., “hard
work always pays off,” “all accountants are stuffy,” “all counselors value altruism
over economic rewards”). Although the interactions of these four factors influence
people differently, there are generally four ways in which they can influence our
career decision making.

1. Self-observation generalizations. Overt or covert statements evaluating our
actual or vicarious performance or self-assessments of our interests and values are
defined as self-observation generalizations (Mitchell & Krumboltz, 1996, p. 244).
Learning experiences lead us to draw conclusions about ourselves. We compare
our performance with the performance of others and to our own performance ex-
pectations, We use these comparisons to draw conclusions about our performance
capabilities. Conclusions about our interests and values also result from learning
experiences. In SLTCDM, interests link learning experiences with specific actions (as
when doing well in a research course leads to the decision to participate in research
projects and teach others about research). Self-observations about values are, in es
sence, statements about the desirability of specific outcomes, behaviors, or events
(Mitchell & Krumboltz, 1996). For example, the statement that “it is important
that my job provides ample time for me to be with my family” is a values-related.
self-observation generalization about desirable outcomes resulting from previous
learning experiences.


--- chapter2/42.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND ApplyInG THEORIES OF Cares Devetorvent 83

2. Worldview generalizations. Likewise, generalizations about the nature and
functioning of the world (e.g., “It’s not what you know, it’s who you know,” “It is
better to try and fail than to not try at all”) are formed from learning experiences.
The accuracy of worldview generalizations is dependent on the learning experiences
shaping such generalizations.

3. Task-approach skills. Mitchell and Krumboltz (1996) define these out-
comes as “cognitive and performance abilities and emotional predispositions
for coping with the environment, interpreting it in relation to self-observation
generalizations, and making covert and overt predictions about future events”
(p. 246), As noted earlier, task-approach skills influence career decision making
and are outcomes of learning experiences that shape individuals’ career devel-
opment, Task-approach skills critical to career development are those involved
in decision making, problem solving, goal setting, information gathering, and
values clarifying.

4. Actions. Learning experiences eventually fead individuals to take actions
related to entering a career. These actions can include applying for a job, entering a
training program, applying to college, changing jobs, or taking other overt steps to
make progress in one’s career.

The SLTCDM suggests that career decision making is “influenced by complex
environmental (e.g., economic) factors, many of which are beyond the control of any
single individual” (Krumboitz, Mitchell, & Gelatt, 1976, p. 75). The theory also un-
derscores “the interaction between innate predispositions and learning experiences
within the intra-individual, family, social, educational and cultural context” (Krumboltz
& Henderson, 2002, p. 43). Also, based on SLTCDM, Krumboltz (1994) noted that
people will prefer an occupation if:

1. They have succeeded at tasks they believe are like tasks performed by members
of that occupation.

2, They have observed a valued model being reinforced for activities like those
performed by members of that occupation.

3. A valued friend or relative stressed its advantages to them and/or they observed
positive words and images being associated with it. (p. 19)

Conversely, Krumboltz noted that people will avoid an occupation if:

1, They have failed at tasks they believe are similar to tasks performed by people in
that occupation,

2. They have observed a valued model being punished or ignored for performing
activities like those performed by members of that occupation.

3. A valued friend or relative stressed its disadvantages to them and/or they have
observed negative words and images being associated with it. (p. 19)

The Learning Theory of Career Counseling

The strength of SLTCDM is that it provides a description of factors influencing
career decision making and identifies outcomes resulting from those influential fac-
tors. As such, it is a useful theory for understanding career paths retrospectively, The
understanding acquired from such a perspective is helpful in making current career
decisions and in formulating future career goals,


--- chapter2/43.jpg ---

84

Cxaprer 2

When career concerns arise, they typically involve one or more of the fallow-
ing: (a) the absence of a goal, or career indecision (Juanita’s presenting concern);
(b) expressed feeling of concern about high aspirations, or unrealism; and (c) a
conflict berween equally appropriate alternatives, or multipotentiality (Krumboltz &
Thoresen, 1969). Krumboltz developed the learning theory of career counseling
(LTCC) to guide counselors in constructing career development interventions to help
clients cope more effectively with these career concerns. Specifically, counselors us-
ing LTCC help clients to: (a) acquire more accurate self-observation generalizations,
(b} acquire more accurate worldview generalizations, (c) learn new task approach
skills, and (d) take appropriate career-related actions. LTCC assumes that counselors
must be prepared to help their clients cope with four current career-related trends
identified by Mitchell and Krumboltz (1996, pp. 250-252).

1, People need to expand their capabilities and interests, not base decisions on
existing characteristics only. Interest inventories assess what we know and what
we have experienced, To maximize a client’s career choice options, counselors
must encourage that client to explore new activities, develop new interests, and
consider new options based on newly formed interests and capabilities.

2. People need to prepare for changing work tasks, and not assume that occupa-
tions will remain stable. Because change is constant, career counselors must help
their clients identify new skills to learn and develop strategies for coping with the
stress inherent in an ever-changing world of work.

3. People need to be empowered to take action, not merely to be given a diagnosis,
For some clients, implementing a career choice is more challenging than making
the choice. Many clients need ongoing assistance from their career counselors as
they attempt to adjust to the career choice made and implemented,

4. Careet counselors need to play a major role in dealing with all career problems,
not just career selection. Career-related concerns exist beyond this concern of
identifying a career choice. Many clients struggle with the burnout, underem-
ployment, relationships with coworkers, family members’ reactions to career
choices, and low self-efficacy,

These four trends suggest the importance of providing clients with learning
experiences to (a) correct faulty assumptions, (b) learn new skills and interests,
(c) identify effective strategies for addressing issues emanating from interactions
between work and other life-role activities and concerns, and (d) learn skills for
coping with changing work tasks. Career counselors can use assessments to help
clients identify what characteristics (e.g., beliefs, skills, values, interests, personal-
ity) they have learned and to identify opportunities for learning new characteris-
tics. Thus, the task of the career counselor is to promote client learning and the goal
of career counseling is to enhance the ability of clients to create satisfying lives for
themselves (Krumboltz, 1996).

Applying LTCC

Krumboltz (1996) divides career development interventions into two categories:
(a) developmental/preventive and (b} targeted/remedial. The former includes career
education programs, school-to-work initiatives, job club programs, study materials,
and simulations. These career development interventions facilitate the acquisition


--- chapter2/44.jpg ---

UNDERSTANDING AND ApPIYING THEORES OF Career DevesormentT = 85

of accurate and occupational self-information and the use of this information in the
career decision-making process. Learning through active on-the-job participation
(e.g., job shadowing, internships, and worksite observation) is emphasized. It is im-
portant to note that although many clients, such as Juanita, could certainly benefit
from participating in many of these activities, they must first receive more targeted
and remedial career development interventions.

Targeted and remedial career development interventions include goal clarifica-
tion, cognitive restructuring, cognitive rehearsal, narrative analysis, role playing,
desensitization, paradoxical intention, and humor (Krumboltz, 1996, pp. 66-72).
LTCC also emphasizes the importance of teaching decision-making skills to cli-
ents. Learning how to make career decisions helps clients to resolve current career
concerns and equips clients with an important task approach skill for coping with
changing work and personal conditions in the future (Krumboltz, 1976). For ex-
ample, once Juanita has clarified her goals and learns how to make good decisions,
she will then be ready to participate in more focused on-the-job activities (e.g., job
shadowing, volunteering).

To help counselors identify problematic client beliefs related to each of the career
problem categories (Le., indecision, unrealism, and multipotentiality), Krumboltz (1988)
developed the Career Beliefs Inventory (CBI). The CBI is based on the rationale that
people make career decisions according to what they believe about themselves and
the world-of-work. As Krumboltz wrote in 1994, “If their beliefs are accurate and
constructive, they will act in ways that are likely to help them achieve their goals.
If their beliefs are inaccurate and self-defeating, they will act in a way that makes
sense to them but may not help them achieve their goals” (p. 424). The CBI helps
counselors to understand their clients’ career beliefs and assumptions. Thus, the
instrument is most useful when administered at the beginning of career counseling.
The CBI contains 25 scales organized into the following five categories: My Current
Career Situation, What Seems Necessary for My Happiness, Factors That Influence
My Decisions, Changes I Am Willing to Make, and Efforts | Am Willing to Initiate.
These categories are related to mental barriers blocking clients from taking action.
As Krumboltz and Henderson (2002) remind us, meaningful journeys, including
our career journey, contain obstacles that must be confronted. Some clients allow
discouragement and other problematic beliefs to dominate their thinking and thwart
efforts to take positive actions. Self-defeating beliefs such as those measured by the
CBI must be addressed if the client is to move forward. Counseling strategies such
as cognitive restructuring and reframing are useful in helping the client to address
these issues.

Related to the notion of career beliefs is the fact that often in career counseling,
clients refer to significant events in ways that suggest the client had little to do with
the experience. For example, a client may say “I just got lucky” or “I just happened
to be in the right place at the right time.” Krumboltz and his associates (Mitchell,
Levin, & Krumboltz, 1999) recognize that career counseling often involves helping
clients understand and take advantage of the chance events they encounter in daily
